Student Manual of Policies
(MoP)
for

BSc (Hons.) & MA
Mass Communication Program

JULY 2020
Office of the Dean (Academics)
Xavier School of Communications (XCOMM)
XAVIER UNIVERSITY BHUBANESWAR (XUB)
(Established in accordance with the Xavier University Odisha Act 2013)

Xavier School of Communications
(XCOMM)

Student Manual of Policies
(MoP)

JULY 2020
(This Student Manual of Policies (MoP) comes into effect from
July 2020, and it supersedes all the previous MoPs issued by the
Xavier School of Communications in this regard)

Office of the Dean (Academics)
Xavier School of Communications (XCOMM)

TABLE OF CONTENT
Sl. No.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Particulars

Page

Applicability

Xavier University Bhubaneswar (XUB), Odisha, India

Xavier University Bhubaneswar Vision, Mission and Values

Xavier School of Communications (XCOMM)

Academic Programs

Academic Calendar

Academic Guidelines

7.1 Registration

7.2 Attendance

7.3 Leave of Absence and Classroom Etiquette

7.4 Discipline

7.4.1 Conduct

7.4.2 Misconduct

7.4.2.1 Ragging

7.4.3 Disciplinary Procedure

7.4.4 Penalty

7.4.5 Appeal

7.4.6 Grievance Resolution

7.4.7 Alcoholic Abuse Deterrence Policy

7.5 Curriculum Design

7.6 Methodology

7.7 Internship

7.8 Policy on Plagiarism

7.9 Feedback

7.10 Performance Counselling/Student Mentorship

8. Examination and Valuation System

8.1 Components of Evaluation

8.2 Grading Pattern

8.3 Qualifying Standards

8.4 Disqualification

8.5 Clarification/re-evaluation

8.6 Necessary Qualifying Criteria

8.7 Mode of Conducting Examination

8.8 Examination and Declaration of Result

8.9 Supplementary, Spl. Examination and Number of Chances 25
8.10 Code of Conduct During Examination

8.11 Penalties Imposed for Misconduct in the Examination

8.12 Admission to Higher Class and Semester

8.13 Degree and Transcripts

8.14 Medals

9. Use of XCOMM Studios/Computer Lab/Editing Lab

10. Payment of Fees

11. Miscellaneous

12. Career Advisory Services & Internship Committee

13. Faculty

14. Contact Information

1. APPLICABILITY
The Policies contained in this Manual come into effect from the date of
Registration of a student in the School. The Policies prescribed in the
Manual are applicable to all the students of XCOMM, without prejudice
to any actions or decisions already taken in the previous Academic Year
and also without prejudice to any special rules framed or to be framed
with regard to Students’ Residence (Hostel), Internship Assistance,
Library, Computer Lab and Studios.
Each student must possess a copy of the “Manual of Policies” (MoP) and
should carefully go through the policies prescribed there in and adhere
to it in every aspect. Onus of knowing the content and following them
will be the responsibility of the student.

Disclaimer: The statements made in this Student Manual of Policies and all other
information, contained herein is believed to be correct at the time of publication.
However, the School/ University reserves the right to make any changes in and
additions to the policies and regulations, conditions governing the conduct of
students, requirements for degree, fees and any other information or statements
contained in this Manual from time to time. No responsibility will be accepted by the
University for hardship or expense encountered by its students or any other person for
such changes, additions, omissions or errors, no matter how they are caused.

Dean (Academics)
Xavier School of Communications (XCOMM)
Xavier University Bhubaneswar (XUB)

2. XAVIER UNIVERSITY BHUBANESWAR (XUB), ODISHA, INDIA
Xavier University is a private unitary University located in the state of Odisha. The
University has been established in accordance with The Xavier University, Odisha
Act, 2013. The University is a private self-financing institution of higher learning for
imparting professional and technical education. Xavier University is: A Jesuit
University; A Digital University; A Research University; An Innovative University
and A Progressive University with a vision of Inspiring Futures.
Xavier University Bhubaneswar has several Schools and Centers of Excellence.
XIMB, a 33-year-old business school is one of the Schools of the Xavier University.
Besides XIMB, the University has established several other Schools such as Xavier
School of Communications, Xavier School of Human Resource Management, Xavier
School of Rural Management, Xavier School of Human Settlement, Xavier School of
Sustainability, Xavier School of Commerce, Xavier School of Economics, Xavier
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Xavier Law School, School of
Governance & Public Affairs, Xavier Center for Humanities and Compassion Studies,
and many more. Xavier University Bhubaneswar has proposed to venture into
national and international programs of high quality.
3. XAVIER UNIVERSITY BHUBANESWAR VISION, MISSION AND
VALUES
VISION
“Enabling people to live extraordinary lives, and be the light of the world”
Taking its inspiration from Saint Francis Xavier, a Jesuit scholar whose name this
University is privileged to take as its own, Xavier University Bhubaneswar strives to
become a globally recognized center of learning and of service to the people of
Odisha, of India, and the whole world, by its commitment to excellence in all spheres
of human life as lived out in individuals and in institutions.
It seeks to become the leader as a research-oriented University that generates
knowledge and disseminates it for the benefit of all. It will be a leader as a visionary
University by equipping every student with the necessary competence to create a just
society in which all can lead a meaningful life. It will endeavor to become a global
leader in higher education by its vision that seeks to innovatively transform the world
into a just and humane society.
MISSION
“Education in the Spirit of Magis”
•

The mission of Xavier University Bhubaneswar shall be to imitate Christ as the
model of wisdom for youth in the service of justice, peace, truth, and building a
civilization of love.

•

Its avowed mission is to develop scholars, committed to their own life-long and
global development, and nurtured in their careers and in their lives by the spirit of
their alma mater to be unique person and responsible citizen.

•

Established in the ancient land of India, Xavier University Bhubaneswar
believes that serious and sustained dialogue among people of different faiths,
cultures, and beliefs carried on in her domain and extended to all forms of
public life, can promote intellectual, ethical, and spiritual understanding of all
God’s people, through its various Schools.

•

It will use higher education as a means to proclaim the ideals and values of a
culture of peace and search for Truth.

•

It will guide and motivate its students to go beyond knowledge and become
practitioners of the Truth that underlies all knowledge and wisdom, the Truth that
is the ultimate goal of all learning.

VALUES
•

Integrity and Excellence: Xavier University believes in personal, academic and
professional integrity, and being truthful to oneself and to others in all its
endeavors. It believes in meeting the standards required to make our products and
services unique and attractive.

•

Compassion and Commitment: Xavier University believes that each individual
is unique, different and capable. It takes utmost care to meet the needs of its
stakeholders. Xavier University family members take pride in identifying
themselves with the University, its activities and partners.

•

Social and Ecological Sensitivity: Xavier University believes in serving and
empowering those who are denied of opportunities for development caused by
social, economic and cultural discrimination. Xavier University tries to promote
the inherent worth of living beings regardless of their instrumental utility to
human needs and be sensitive to the ecosystem and natural processes.

4. XAVIER SCHOOL OF COMMUNICATIONS (XCOMM)
The Xavier School of Communications came into existence on July 2, 2015. With its
roots back in history, brand ‘Xavier’ has grown tremendously. As a place of higher
learning, it has stood to live up to its motto of ‘Inspiring Futures’. Being one of the
premiere media schools, the Xavier School of Communications is a pioneer in the
field of interactive media education and is considered the most rigorous media
programs in the country. Offering a variety of media courses, XCOMM caters to the
dynamic industry with the students who learn by doing without compromising on
values and ethics- the “Magis Way”.
Vision of XCOMM
“Enabling people to live extraordinary lives, and be the light of the world”
•

To empower the aspiring youth who join XCOMM to be ethically sensitive,
innovative and skillful media professionals contributing to global peace and
harmony.

•

The School strives to promote progressive trends in the areas of communications
and research and envisages students to communicate life to the people across the
world.
Mission of XCOMM
“Communication Education in the Spirit of Magis”

1. To enhance knowledge and professionalism in the field of media and
communication.
2. To promote ethical media practices and keep abreast with the changes of the time.
3. To function as a centre of excellence and to play a vital role in building a new
media culture where life is respected and valued.
Key Objectives
•
•

To equip students with the necessary technical know-how of the high-end
software and hardware, making them employable in the ever-evolving media
industry.
To facilitate knowledge centre and repository of media research and thereby
contributing to knowledge sharing and community building.

Logo of XCOMM: XCOMM believes in Communicating Life in the Spirit of Magis.
It is inclusive in nature. The X symbol with raised hands symbolizes openness to
communicating truth. The four symbols represent every medium of communication.
The IHS seal represents the vision and mission of the Society of Jesus and its
commitment to University Education.
5. ACADEMIC PROGRAMS
Xavier School of Communications offers Undergraduate, Postgraduate and Doctoral
Programs.
6. ACADEMIC CALENDAR
The academic calendar in a year consists of two semesters. The entire program is
spread over six semesters for BSc (Hons.) Mass Communication and four semesters
for MA Mass Communication. The academic year commences with an “Orientation
Program” for the newly admitted students and regular classes begin soon after the
Orientation. The calendar includes scheduled classes, workshops, guest lectures,
symposiums, conferences and field learning.
7. ACADEMIC GUIDELINES
7.1 REGISTRATION: Students are required to register in person on the day of
registration as per the admission offer letter and thereafter on the first day of each
subsequent semester as indicated in the Academic Calendar. The Dean’s Office will
verify the original certificates that are indicated in the admission letter. In case
original certificates are not available at the time of verification, provisional
certificates have to be produced.

Students, who fail to submit their Mark Sheets, Certificate/degree from their
respective Board/University on the day of verification, should submit them latest by
the Registration Day of semester-II, failing which a student’s registration may be
cancelled except under certain circumstances with specific approval from the Dean
(Academics) - XCOMM. Under exceptional circumstances, the Dean (Academics) XCOMM can extend the last date for submission of certificates in support of the
qualifying degree for an appropriate period in consultation with the Academic
Committee/Registrar/Vice Chancellor. The qualifying examination (intermediate for
UG) and of minimum 3-year or 4-year duration (for PG) must be completed before
the date of registration at the University.
Those who fail to register for each semester after joining the Program on the
specified date as per the calendar will be deemed to have left the University unless
prior permission for delayed registration is obtained from the Dean (Academics) –
XCOMM. If the Dean (Academics) permits, a student can register by paying a late
registration fee of Rs.500/- (Rupees five hundred) per day after the due date subject
to a maximum allowance of 10 days for late registration. The late registration fee is
payable irrespective of the reason or circumstances for the delay in seeking
registration.
A student is not permitted to pursue any other course under any other University,
while s/he is registered as a student in the XCOMM Program of the Xavier
University.
7.2 ATTENDANCE
The University attaches great importance to punctual and regular attendance of all
class sessions. Class attendance is a revered value to possess and will help a student
prepare for future work ethics towards employment. It will also increase his/her
performance merit in the above-mentioned programs in Mass Communication at
XCOMM.
The guidelines mentioned below will be followed for all courses. However, in some
unusual circumstances and due to the nature of a particular course, the faculty may
follow a suitable attendance policy, which may deviate from the following guidelines.
But in all such cases, the policy shall be announced to the students at the beginning of
the course, be fully explained in the course outline, and communicated to the Dean’s
Office by the faculty concerned.
75% of class attendance is mandatory for each course. Any candidate who fails to put
in less than 75% of attendance in a course will not be permitted to write/appear the
end semester examination. Exception can be made after assessing the case with the
student and the concerned faculty for a valid reason. As a corrective measure, a
penalty may be imposed by the Dean (Academics) in the matter. If a student is absent
for more than 50% of classroom sessions for any reason, s/he will not be permitted to
give end semester examination. Faculty teaching the course may take attendance
record as one of the components for internal assessment.

The attendance is marked in each class on paper or through the Academic Information
System (AIS), and the record is forwarded in the specified format to the Dean’s
Office at the end of the course.
Exemption from attending classes is not permissible for reasons other than prolonged
sickness, grave personal tragedy and University work/representation. A committee of
the concerned faculty and the Dean (Academics) may, however, advise suitable
relaxation in penalty for exceptionally deserving cases.
In the case of any force majeure, an event or effect that can be neither anticipated nor
controlled, decision of the University to find other modes of teaching & lecturing will
be accepted by the student body to continue the academic activity going for the
benefit of all.
7.3 LEAVE OF ABSENCE AND CLASSROOM ETIQUETTE
Under special circumstances a student may be granted leave of absence. Such leave
of absence will be granted on application, for good and sufficient reasons, by the
Dean (Academics).
The application should be addressed to the Dean (Academics) and submitted in the
Office of the Dean along with relevant documents, including approval/ agreement of
the concerned faculty. For absence on health grounds, the student must attach the
doctor’s prescription, medicine bill and a copy of the medical tests report, if any. All
such applications must be submitted within one week of resuming of classes, failing
which the applications will not be accepted. Applications on non-medical ground
should be submitted and permission taken from the concerned faculty and then the
Dean (Academics) prior to going on leave.
Faculty is not responsible for any student losing any segment of evaluation because of
leave availed by him/her with prior permission. Make-up of class tests which are
missed due to such absence is left entirely to the discretion of the faculty.
Students are strictly prohibited from using mobile phones in the
classrooms/studio/lab when the lecture is on, failing which the faculty is authorized
to confiscate the device. However, the faculty can allow students to use mobile
phones in the classroom for the purpose of learning through mobile applications if
course demands. If violation of this rule results in confiscation of mobile phone set,
the confiscated mobiles of students will be given back to the students only at the end
of the semester after paying a fine of Rs. 2000/-.
The students are expected to be in the class before the scheduled time. The late
comers will not be allowed to enter the class once the faculty begins the session.
7.4 DISCIPLINE
Giving highest regard to safety, law and order and considering the well-being of all
members of Xavier University Bhubaneswar and its pupils, Xavier University
Bhubaneswar compliances with the UGC mandate and the sovereign laws of the land.

Xavier University Bhubaneswar endeavors to adhere, implement and enforce the
Mandates of the UGC regulations pertaining to the below mentioned subject/item in
the Manual of Policies-the governing document for students conduct within and
outside the University Campus.
Sl.
No.
1)

2)

Subject
matter/Item
Sexual
Harassment
(prevention,
prohibition and
redressal)
Alcohol
deterrence and
prevention of
drug abuse

Governing
Regulation
https://www.ugc.ac.in/pdfnews/7203627_UGC_regulations
-harassment.pdf
The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013
University Grants Commission (UGC) has issued a circular
to all Vice Chancellors on 02.04.2013 regarding strict
adherence to the provisions of the Cigarettes and Other
Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and
Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply
and Distribution) Act, 2003 and its Rules I.e. Cigarettes and
other Tobacco Products (Packaging and Labelling) Rules,
2008.
Circular issued on 27.8.2013 by UGC for implementation
of the actionable points of the National Policy on Narcotic
Drugs & Psychotropic Substances (NDPS). NDPS deals
with steps to tackle the problem of sale of drug to school
and college children.
https://mhrd.gov.in/steps-prevent-drug-abuse-colleges

3)

4)

5)

Anti-Ragging

Deterrence
towards causing
bodily harm or
mental harm
Deterrence of
Cyber law
violation

Report on Alcohol use in Dr.Rajendra Prasad Government
Medical College (RPGMC) Kangra, Himachal Pradesh
(Committee Constituted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court).
https://www.ugc.ac.in/oldpdf/ragging/gazzetaug2010.pdf
https://www.ugc.ac.in/pdfnews/7823260_Anti-Ragging3rd-Amendment.pdf 2016
https://www.nitt.edu/home/students/UGC_Regulations.pdf
Indian Penal Code 1860 – Offences Affecting Life

Information of Technology Act 2000
https://www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/files/itbill2000.pdf
http://cyberpolicebangalore.nic.in/pdf/Cyber%20law%20IP
C.pdf

For any matter reported under the above enlisted items (subjects), if the offender is a
resident of the students’ residence (hostel), s/he will be suspended immediately from
the residence pending investigation and decision by the University authorities. For

any matter reported under the above enlisted items (subjects), the parents/guardian
shall be intimated by the Dean (Academics) and or in charge and or the students’
residence (hostel) prefect. FIR to be filed to initiate action towards deterrence of such
violations.
Whereas in case of a minor’s (below 18 years of age) charged with violation of any of
the aforementioned items, the University shall bear no burden for/of the same.
7.4.1 Conduct: The University attaches utmost importance to personal
integrity, honesty, and discipline. A sense of responsibility and a high degree
of maturity is expected of all students inside and outside the campus, as befits
future media professionals and as students of Xavier University Bhubaneswar.
The University strives to achieve this standard in every phase of campus life.
Each student of the University shall consciously strive to excel in his/her
personal as well as academic conduct. A proven case of violation of the
aforesaid behavioral norms can expose the student to deprivation of a place in
the merit list, award of medal and other such penalties such as dismissal from
the University.
7.4.2 Misconduct: The following are considered serious breaches of
discipline and will attract the penalty of immediate expulsion from the
University:
7.4.2.1 Ragging: Ragging constitutes one or more of any of the
following acts:
a) Any conduct by any student or students whether by words spoken or
written or by an act which has the effect of teasing, treating or
handling with rudeness a fresher or any other student.
b) Indulging in rowdy or undisciplined activities by any student or
students which causes or is likely to cause annoyance, hardship,
physical or psychological harm or to raise fear or apprehension thereof
in any fresher or any other student.
c) Asking any student to do any act which such student will not in the
ordinary course do and which has the effect of causing or generating a
sense of shame, or torment or embarrassment so as to adversely affect
the physique or psyche of such fresher or any other student.
d) Any act by a senior student that prevents, disrupts or disturbs the
regular academic activity of any other student or a fresher.
e) Exploiting the services of a fresher or any other student for
completing the academic tasks assigned to an individual or a group of
students.
f) Any act of financial extortion or forceful expenditure burden put on
a fresher or any other student by students.

g) Any act of physical abuse including all variants of it: sexual abuse,
homosexual assaults, stripping, forcing obscene and lewd acts,
gestures, causing bodily harm or any other danger to health or person;
h) Any act or abuse by spoken words, emails, post, public insults
which would also include deriving perverted pleasure, vicarious or
sadistic thrill from actively or passively participating in the
discomfiture to fresher or any other student.
i) Any act that affects the mental health and self-confidence of a
fresher or any other student with or without an intent to derive a
sadistic pleasure or showing off power, authority or superiority by a
student over any fresher.
j) Any act of physical or mental abuse (including bullying and
exclusion) targeted at another student (fresher or otherwise) on the
ground of color, race, religion, caste, ethnicity, gender (including
transgender), sexual orientation, appearance, nationality, regional
origins, linguistic identity, place of birth, place of residence or
economic background.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in its order dated 08.05.2009
Civil Appeal No. (887/2009) has completely banned Ragging in
educational institutions and the University Grants Commission on the
directives of the Supreme Court framed guidelines for “Regulation on
Curbing the Menace of Ragging in Higher Educational Institutions,
2009” Xavier University Bhubaneswar compliance the order of
Hon'ble Supreme Court and the guidelines of University Grants
Commission. As per the Honorable Supreme Court’s guidelines on
Ragging vide SLP. No. 24295 of 2006, in case of any cognizable
offences of ragging by a student would be reported to the Police and
appropriate action initiated as per law.
7.4.2.2 Indulging in or aiding/abetting acts of violence, riotous or
disorderly behavior, moral turpitude, directed at a fellow-student or a
faculty or any other employee of the University/ students’ residence
(hostel) mess, etc.
7.4.2.3 Fraud, dishonesty, misappropriation of University funds or
funds of Students’ Organizations, misuse of Rail/Air concessions, and
complicity in other financial irregularities in connection with
studentship of the University.
7.4.2.4 Involvement in serious academic malpractice, including
plagiarism as per the Manual of Policies for Students.
7.4.2.5 Reporting of fictitious data in an empirical study as and when
detected and established.

7.4.2.6 Indulging in the violation of community and organizational
norms, practices and values during internship or any other external
academic or non-academic activity leading to physical and
psychological harm to individuals and groups in the community and
organization.
7.4.2.7 Any misuse of equipment at the studios of the School of
Communications or theft of software at the lab or any stealing of
equipment and misuse of the Information Technology infrastructure of
the University through software, hardware, applications, systems or
process or stealing video footage from the computer lab;
(a) Indulging in anonymous slander, deception, harassment, and the
like using information technology.
(b) Violation of software copyrights.
7.4.2.8 Unsolicited communication by group email.
7.4.2.9 Impersonation or proxy submission of assignments, reports and
other documents to the faculty.
7.4.2.10. Leveling false and baseless allegations against any faculty
member or officer or employee of the University.
(a) Doing or causing to do any act, which is likely to adversely affect
the relations of the University with its customers, i.e., industrial
organizations;
(b) Indulging in any act or acts, such as, defacing, burning or otherwise
damaging any banner or property or equipment of a company, erected
by the company or by an Association of Xavier University
Bhubaneswar commemorating an event organized or sponsored by the
company at Xavier University Bhubaneswar;
(c) Indulging in any act subversive of general discipline (the word
“discipline” being used here in its generic sense and in its widest
amplitude), inside or outside the campus, and/or is detrimental to the
reputation image or standing of the University;
(d) Indulging in dissemination of unsolicited and/or malicious
correspondences either electronically or through hard copies within the
University and outside which distorts the image or disturbs the
collegiate atmosphere of the University;
(e) Not withstanding any of the above-mentioned aspects, the
University can immediately expel the student(s) if it deems any action
of the student as an act of indiscipline. The decision of the University
would be final and binding and by accepting admission in this
University, the student on his/her part also accepts this clause in full;

(f) Absence without prior permission from the Dean (Academics) and
the Faculty; and/or mass absence from classes;
(g) Drinking and use of addictive substances like drugs or weeds or
cocaine smoking in the public areas;
(h) Entering the restricted areas like Xerox room in the main building
without the express permission of the concerned authority;
(i) Theft, fraud, dishonesty, bribing or attempt to bribe;
(j) Copying in any form in the assignments, projects or in any
examination;
(k) Permitting, whether willfully or otherwise, a co-student to copy
from one’s own answer book or document or material;
(l) Smoking in the campus area;
(m) Communication of written analyses or answers, in any manner
whatsoever, to other student(s) in respect of home assignments or
projects of individual nature;
(n) Whispering or communicating with one another by means of signs,
symbols or gestures or in any other body language in the examination
hall;
(o) Any other act of indiscipline, which is herein unspecified and
deemed at the time of offence as an inappropriate behavior and
conduct by the Disciplinary Committee of Xavier University
Bhubaneswar and/or the management of the University.
(p) Any student who has withdrawn the admission on account of any
disciplinary action taken previously by either school or university
CANNOT BE ADMITTED into the program again.
(q) If a student is expelled due to disciplinary action, fee paid for the
program will not be refunded.
7.4.3 Disciplinary Procedure
7.4.3.1 For minor acts of indiscipline the Faculty/Instructor/Evaluator shall be
the sole disciplinary authority acting on his/her own judgment. A Faculty can
award penalty as per the merit of case may be.
7.4.3.2 For major acts of indiscipline the Dean (Academics) shall refer the
matter
to
the
University
Disciplinary
Committee/Academic
Committee/Faculty Council at his/her discretion. The decision proposed by the
committee/s will be final and binding.

7.4.3.3 In cases of exigencies with time constraints and in cases of extreme
gravity, the Dean (Academics) may award a penalty deemed appropriate in
consultation with the Faculty concerned and University Disciplinary
Committee.
7.4.3.4 Before the imposition of any penalty, the explanation of the student
concerned and his/her record of the past misconduct, similar or otherwise shall
be taken into consideration. Repeat of any misconduct and number of
incidents of misconduct shall add to the gravity of the offence and invite
higher penalty.
7.4.4 Penalty: One or more of the penalties listed below can be awarded to a student
for breach of discipline amounting to misconduct:
a) Warning
b) Reduction of marks/quality points/grade in a component of a Course
c) Reduction of marks/quality points/grade for the whole Course
d) Fine up to Rs. 5000/e) Repeating a course of the first/second year as the case may be, along with the
next batch.
f) Suspension of studentship for a year/debarred from availing placement
facilities.
g) Expulsion from the University.
h) Cancellation or withdrawal of any Academic honors – Certificate of Merit,
Diploma, Medal, Scholarship, etc.
i) Notwithstanding any of the above-mentioned aspects, the University can
immediately expel the student if it deems any action of the student as an act of
indiscipline. The decision of the University would be final and binding and by
accepting admission in this University, the student on his/her part also accepts
this clause in full.
7.4.5 Appeal: In matters of sufficient gravity, a student may appeal within one week
of punishment, to the Vice Chancellor for review. The Vice Chancellor’s decision
shall be final.
7.4.6 Grievance Resolution
a) Any student, having a grievance, may submit a written application to the Dean
(Academics) setting out all the circumstances and/or details therein clearly.
The student concerned should sign the grievance application.
b) Anonymous applications/petitions/letters will not be entertained or attended to
under any circumstances.

c) If a student, having obtained grade “D” or grade “F” in any course, feels that
he or she has been unfairly discriminated against in evaluation/grading or has
become a victim of subjectivity or internal inequity, s/he can make a
representation to the Dean (Academics) within seven days after receiving the
grade. No grievance shall be considered, if the student has obtained any grade
above “C”.
d) The representation should set out all the circumstances and grounds and
should be accompanied by all the relevant documents in support of the
allegation. If the Dean (Academics) is not satisfied with the representation,
and that there is a prima facie case, the Dean (Academics) may constitute a
Committee in consultation with the faculty concerned and get the papers/issue
re-examined.
e) In all such cases, however, the onus of proving such discrimination,
subjectivity or internal inequity, as the case may be, lies entirely on the student
concerned. If, at any time during investigation, it is found that the allegations
are mala fide or wild or without substance, the student concerned will expose
himself/herself to the risk of extreme punishment of expulsion from the
University as provided herein.
f) The students’ residence (hostel) prefect will deal with misconduct related to
residential rules with the help of the Dean (Academics), Registrar, and the
Vice Chancellor, as per the students’ residence (hostel) Administration Rules
of Xavier University Bhubaneswar.
7.4.7 Alcoholic Abuse Deterrence Policy
The University has zero tolerance for possession, solicitation, distribution, sale or use
of alcohol on campus by the students. The students engaging in any of these shall be
expelled from the Xavier University Bhubaneswar.
This policy applies to all students at any time and at any place on campus. By this
policy, the student may receive dismissal notice for the following offences:
a) Alcohol or use of drugs or any addictive substance or possession on campus,
b) Alcohol or use of drugs or any addictive substance off campus that
discredits Xavier University Bhubaneswar,
c) In this case the student will not be awarded Degree, without paying penalty of
Rs. 100000/- (One lakh).
A student, who is dismissed on this ground, after having gone through the counseling
and rehabilitation, wishes to rejoin the program, may do so, in the following academic
year by paying a penalty of Rs.100000/- (One lakh) as readmission fee, besides the
fee applicable for that year. Student’s readmission request must accompany Doctor’s
certification as proof of sufficient treatment for reducing alcohol dependency and
abuse.

The readmission request of the student shall be made formally by an application along
with Rs.100000/- (one lakh) and upon receipt of this application, the students
readmission request shall be decided by the following committee:
1. Registrar
2. Dean (Academics), Xavier School of Communications
3. Coordinator (University Disciplinary Committee)
The University will appreciate any voluntary reporting about any student who has
past history of alcohol or drug abuse. This will be treated confidentially for the
purpose of proposing de-addiction treatment of the student.
7.5 CURRICULUM DESIGN
7.5.1 The curriculum of the School is designed considering both theory and
practice. It aims at providing students with adequate background knowledge
and experience needed to start a career in the field of mass media and
communication. Internships, workshops, symposium, conference, cocurricular activities, industry interface and outbound learning are part and
parcel of the curricula. The curriculum follows semester pattern.
7.5.2 Contact Hours: One credit contains 10 hours of classroom teaching for
both MA & BSc (Hons.) Mass Communication. Every credit will have 10
hours of pre-course and 10 hours of post course personal reading besides 10
hours of classroom teaching. For a three-credit course, visiting faculty may
teach 30 hours per week.
7.5.3 MA Mass Communication: M.A. Mass Communication spread across
four-semesters. Besides the classroom teaching, project works, and internships
are carried out independently by the students with the close watch and
guidance by the mentors and faculty guides.
7.5.4 BSc (Hons.) Mass Communication: This program consists of six
semesters. BSc (Hons.) Mass Communication students are expected to do
common courses like English and Environment Studies as part of the
curriculum. Besides the classroom teaching, project works, and internships are
carried out independently by the students with the close watch and guidance
by the mentors and faculty guides. Students are encouraged to take elective
courses offered by the other schools of the University to fulfil the
requirements of the degree.
Besides residential faculty, visiting faculty are invited to teach specialized
courses or to conduct workshops as per the requirement. Changes will be
made in the class schedule to accommodate visiting faculty.
Curriculum/course outline may be revised, altered, or new courses may be
introduced in consultation with the faculty body and Strategic Academic
Advisory Board (SAAB) of Xavier School of Communications.
7.5.5 Syllabus for each semester will be displayed on the notice board well
before the commencement of the course. Complete syllabus is available on the

Xavier School of Communications’ website. Students can check the syllabus
from the School’s website for more details.
Certain courses may be postponed/rescheduled without prior notice especially
when a visiting faculty takes the course. Some courses may be conducted
combining different batches of students depending on the number of students,
effective group projects/learning and availability of faculty (Visiting/resident).
This is applicable for all the batches across program. Students will be
informed about the change through email or through notice board accordingly.
Seminars, Industry talks, Workshops, Field Trips will be arranged for the
students of XCOMM time to time to enhance knowledge and skills. It is
mandatory for all students to attend such programs. Those who fail to
attend/participate (after having registered for the program) without any valid
reason will pay a fine of Rs. 1000/- (one thousand only) in the accounts office
besides losing out participation in the very next workshop/seminar.
7.6 METHODOLOGY
7.6.1 Teaching methodology consists of lecture inputs, discussions, seminars,
presentations, hands-on training, research papers, project works, dissertation,
audio-visual productions, field trips, etc.
7.6.2 For each field of study, the instructor may use a suitable methodology to
suit the requirements of the course both for theory and practice.
7.6.3 On the commencement of the course, the course outline is given to the
students, specifying the contents of the course, the methodology and the norms
for evaluation. The students may, however, check with the instructor if these
details are not specified. The methodology, sometimes, may be tweaked
depending on the inputs from the students too.
7.6.4 Students are advised to preserve the course outlines, which may be
required for reference during his/her further studies.
7.7 INTERNSHIP
7.7.1 Internship is an integral part of the academic curriculum. It is an
opportunity to fine tune skills learned in the classroom as per the interest of
the student, wherein a student can observe and practice the learning by placing
oneself in the real working situation. Internship is undertaken in consultation
with Career Advisory Services & Internship Committee and the Dean
(Academics) of the school. Summer Internship for both UG and PG students is
not less than 45 working days and for the final year graduating UG students it
is about 90 working days and for the graduating PG students it is about 75
working days. It is mandatory for the students to obtain internship completion
certificate from their respective place of internship on successful completion
of their internship. Students will have to make a presentation on their
internship learning and experience before they begin their next phase of
studies in the School.

7.7.2 A student who does not complete the Internship satisfactorily and or
does not comply with the requirements prescribed for the internship, will have
to repeat the internship module to qualify for the award of degree.
7.7.3 Students, who receive adverse comments from their
company/organization guide/s and do any act which brings disrepute to the
University and the School will be liable for disciplinary action, which may
result in expulsion of a student from the School and the University. Anyone
attempting to tarnish the name of the school or the university due to their bad
behavior or wrong motives, may be called back from the internship place and
will be made to repeat the internship program in the following year.
7.7.4 Internship Policy Manual
7.7.4.1 Students shall find company/organization for their internship as per
their area of interest in line with the curriculum. Internship
place/organization/company has to be approved by the Dean (Academics) and
the faculty in-charge for the internship.
a. Each student must focus on his/her own area of interest for selecting
his/her internship places in consultation with the faculty in-charge.
b. Each one must shortlist at least 3 media houses/agencies/companies on
priority and get connected with them.
c. The Dean (Academics), Career Advisory Services & Internship team and
faculty may assist the students in this process.
d. Before connecting with/approaching to industry, students must work on
their attitude, behavior and learning skills along with a good CV and
presentation skills.
e. The Dean (Academics) will provide an approval letter for internship.
f. A student can apply to 3 organizations seeking internship with the
permission from Career Advisory Services & Internship team.
g. Once a student gets an internship offer letter from any organization, she/he
will not be allowed to apply to any other organization.
h. Failing to comply with the above norm (‘g’) student will be debarred from
the Career Advisory Services & Internship activities.
7.7.4.2 It is the responsibility of the internee to get appointment/confirmation
letter from the organization. Further, it must be validated by faculty and the
Dean (Academics). Internee must share the email id and contact number of the
industry mentor with the academic mentor at the School.
7.7.4.3 If required, the Dean (Academics) will give a recommendation letter
only for those who have done exceptionally well during the semester (in terms

of academic performance, class participation, regular attendance, co-curricular
activities etc.). Students with unsatisfactory attendance record will not get any
assistance from the School for their internship.
7.7.4.4 Progression and Evaluation Process:
a. At the end of each week, an internee shall send a weekly report of the
internship to the faculty mentor duly signed by the industry mentor.
b. Twice a month faculty mentor will collect feedback from the organization.
c. If there are any grievances from either side (internee or organization), it
will be sorted out immediately by the intervention of the faculty mentor
and or the Dean (Academics).
d. Internship completion certificate with adequate feedback by the
organization must be duly signed by the supervisor with organization’s
seal and sent to the School in a sealed envelope, or the organization may
send in the report through e-mail to the Internship in-charge.
e. Internee has to submit a final report (both soft and hard copy) of his/her
work within 5 days after finishing the internship. Further, there would be
an Internship Presentation on internee’s return to the School.
f. Evaluation Criteria: Evaluation is done based on internee’s daily reports,
weekly reports, industry mentor’s feedback, presentation of valid
internship certificate from the organization, class presentation, final
internship report and any other parameters prescribed by the Dean
(Academics) with the consultation of internship in-charge.
7.8 POLICY ON PLAGIARISM
7.8.1 Definition: Plagiarism is the passing off the thoughts or works of
another as one’s own. Plagiarism involves giving the impression that the
student has thought, written, or produced something that has, in fact, been
borrowed from another. This can be done in two ways, either by copying
exactly what the writer has said or by summarizing or paraphrasing the ideas
as your own. Copying the words or ideas of another in a piece of written work
without acknowledgement of the original source, amounts to an attempt to
claim them as one’s own.
7.8.2 Where plagiarism is detected in a piece of submitted work it may be
considered as academic misconduct. However, appropriate quotations and due
acknowledgements of original sources that have been used as references may
enhance a student’s written work.
7.8.3 Responsibility: It is the responsibility of the students to ensure that that
their work is completely free of plagiarism as defined. Each faculty member
shall develop guidelines for the presentation of assignments, reports and

theses, incorporating information on the matter of plagiarism for the courses
he is teaching in addition to the general guidelines provided in the Manual of
Policies for Students. These are to be communicated to the students at the
beginning of each course, preferably, in the Course Outline.
7.8.4 Allegations of Plagiarism: Plagiarism may result from poor technique
or more serious causes such as copying the work of another person, submitting
the work of another person, or closely paraphrasing a piece of work without
due acknowledgment. The circumstances relating to an allegation of
plagiarism shall be assessed to determine which of the following should apply:
•

Minor matters of plagiarism may be dealt with by the faculty member;

•

More serious matters including multiple allegations may be referred to
the Student Disciplinary Committee at the Academics Dean’s
discretion.

7.8.5 Penalty: Each case shall be treated on its merits. The first minor
infringements may be corrected by counseling or by the imposition of a
penalty, as appropriate. Depending on the gravity of the matter, the penalty
imposed may include a warning, resubmission, loss of marks, failure in a
particular task or in a subject, or a charge of misconduct to be dealt with by
the Student Disciplinary Committee.
Where a penalty is imposed, a file note of the matter shall be placed on the
student’s central file and a copy of the file note provided to the student. Before
imposing a penalty for plagiarism, the student’s file should be checked to
determine whether the offence is a first or a subsequent one. For a subsequent
offence, the penalty shall be more severe.
7.9 FEEDBACK
7.9.1 Performance Feedback
a) Instructors will give academic feedback to students periodically on their
performance in person.
b) Time to time instructors
grades/performance is falling.

may

caution

the

students

if

their

7.9.2 The Faculty will communicate to the students, the grades of presentations,
class-tests and other assignments normally within 10 days after the presentation or
test or project or submission of assignment, as the case may be.
7.9.3 The Dean’s Office will announce the final grades through the AIS.
7.9.4 The grades of sponsored candidates, if any, may be communicated to the
sponsoring organizations at the request of the student and/or of the sponsoring
organization. As a general rule, the grades of a student will not be communicated
to any other person or organization without the consent of the student concerned.

7.9.5 BY STUDENT
a) Student’s feedback is taken for the faculty and the course before the
completion of every course through AIS.
b) If a student fails to give feedback through AIS, his/her grades will be
withheld.
7.10 PERFORMANCE COUNSELLING/STUDENT MENTORSHIP
7.10.1 The University desires that all students be at ease and be confident in their
learning experience. In case a student is facing difficulties to excel academically
the University provides counselling help if one so desire.
a) Students experiencing difficulties to perform well in academics may seek
the guidance from respective faculty for performance improvement.
b) Each student shall be placed under the guidance of a faculty advisor or
mentor. Mentors will monitor regular growth of their mentees. Mentors
will also help mentees to choose specialization and internship.
c) The
Dean’s
Office
shall
periodically
communicate
the
performance/conduct of the students concerned to the respective mentor,
who in turn shall appropriately act on the feedback and render
counsel/guidance as necessary.
d) Students may also seek advice/guidance of their mentor as and when they
feel the need for such counsel.
8. EXAMINATION AND EVALUATION SYSTEM
8.1 Components of Evaluation
Each course may have following evaluation components:
Sl. No.

Components
Quiz
Assignment
Mid semester exam
End semester exam

Suggested weightage
10%
10%
30%
50%

a. The above components are suggestive in nature and the concerned faculty has
the discretion to make changes as may be suitable for a particular course.
However, the component of end semester examination shall not be less than
40%.

b. Project work / Dissertation / Practical will also be a component for award of
final degree to a student. The evaluation of these courses will not have above
components.
c. The decision of the Dean (Academics) regarding segment of evaluation of a
paper will be final. A student who needs clarification on his or her grades may
discuss with the concerned faculty/ Dean (Academics) and Dean’s office
within a week of receiving the grades.
d. Faculty will give feedback to students periodically on their performance
through written comments on answer sheets or through individual meetings.
8.1.1 The final grades will be calculated by the Controller of Examination keeping
in mind the evaluation criteria mentioned in the MoP in consultation with the
faculty concerned for the course.
8.1.2 Students are required to strictly adhere to the deadlines prescribed for the
submission of all written assignments, projects, and reports.
8.2 GRADING PATTERN
The Xavier University Bhubaneswar follows a grading pattern as mentioned below:
Letter Grade

Grade Point

O (Outstanding)
A+(Excellent)
A (Very Good)
B+(Good)
B (Above Average)
C (Average)
F (Fail)
Ab (Absent)

8.2.1 Explanation: Under the changed guideline a student securing 6.7 will get a
Letter Grade of B+ which is equivalent to numerical grade point of 7.00 instead of
6.7. Henceforth the faculty will award the final grade in letter grade such as O, A+, A,
B+, B, C and F in a course as mentioned in the above Table. However, for sake of
explanation the following Table may be referred.
Letter
Grade
O
A+
A
B+
B
C
F

Corresponding Grade Point
(As per the new pattern, 2020)

Absolute Grade Point
Range
9.00-10.00
8.00-8.99
7.00-7.99
6.00-6.99
5.00-5.99
4.00-4.99
Below- 4.00

•

A student obtaining Grade F shall be considered failed and will be required to
reappear in the examination.

•

For non-credit courses ‘Satisfactory’ or “Unsatisfactory’ shall be indicated instead
of the letter grade and this will not be counted for the computation of Semester
Grade Point Average (SGPA)/Cumulative Grade Points Average (CGPA)

•

The Universities can decide on the grade or percentage of marks required to pass
in a course and also the CGPA required to qualify for a degree taking into
consideration the recommendations of the statutory professional councils such as
AICTE, MCI, BCI, NCTE etc.,

Illustration of Computation of SGPA and CGPA and Format for Transcripts
BSc (Hons.) Program

Course
Semester I
C-1
C-2
AECC-1
GE-1
Total
Semester II
C-3
C-4
AECC -2
GE-2
Total
Semester III
C-5
C-6
C-7
SEC -1
GE-3
Total
Semester IV
C-8
C-9
C-10
SEC -2
GE-4
Total

Grade
Letter

Grade
Point

A
B+
B
B

B
C
B+
A+

A+
O
A
A
O

B
A+
B
A+
A

Credit

Credit Point
(Credit X Grade
Point)

SGPA
(Credit
Point/Credit)

6.9 (138/20)

6.7 (134/20)

9.15 (238/26)

7.38 (192/26)

Semester V
C-11
C-12
DSE-1
DSE-2
Total
Semester VI
C-13
C-14
DSE-3
DSE-4
Total
CGPA
Grand
Total
Semester 1
Credit: 20;
SGPA: 6.9

B
B+
O
A

A+
A
B+
A

Semester 2
Credit: 20;
SGPA: 6.7

Semester 3
Credit: 26;
SGPA: 9.15

Semester 4
Credit: 26;
SGPA: 7.38

7.75 (186/24)

8.0 (192/24)

7.71
(1080/140)

Semester 5
Credit: 24;
SGPA: 7.75

Semester 6
Credit: 24;
SGPA: 8.0

Thus, CGPA is
(20 x 6.9 + 20 x 6.7 + 26 x 9.15 + 26 x 7.38 + 24 x 7.75 + 24 x 8.0)/ 140 = 7.71
Absolute grading pattern will be followed for BSc (Hons.) Mass Communication
Program. Relative grading in the MA Mass Communication Program.
8.3 QUALIFYING STANDARDS
8.3.1 For the students of BSc (Hons.) Mass Communication, one has to clear every
semester with a minimum of 40% in every course. At the end of the third year the
minimum overall grade of a student should be at least C.
8.3.2 For the students of MA Mass Communication, one has to clear every semester
with a minimum of 50% in every course. At the end of the second year the minimum
overall grade of a student should be at least B.
8.4 DISQUALIFICATION
8.4.1 If a student fails in three or more courses in a semester and again fails to clear
the courses in the supplementary exams conducted soon after, s/he is not being
promoted to the next semester. Either student will be asked to leave the program or
repeat the year as per the decision taken by the Dean (Academics).
8.4.2 In case for grave reason/failure, a student has to apply for re-test/supplementary
examination to the Controller of Examinations through the Dean (Academics), by
paying an examination fee of Rs. 1000/- for each course in the first attempt and
Rs. 2000/- in the case of second attempt. The decision to allow any student who fails
even after two given chances is reserved with the Dean (Academics).

8.4.3 Grace Mark: Grace Mark/s will be given to those candidates who by receiving
the same are able to clear final year end semester examination to qualify for the award
of degree in case of failure in one course.
8.4.4 Aggregate grace marks awarded shall not exceed 2% of the total marks of end
semester examination subject to the condition that grace marks in any particular
course shall not exceed 10% of the maximum marks for that course.
8.4.5 The grace mark so awarded to a student will be deducted from another course
where the student has secured highest mark in that semester, keeping the aggregate
mark of the student unchanged.
8.5 CLARIFICATION/RE-EVALUATION
(a) A student seeking clarification on any grade awarded to him/her may meet the
Instructor concerned within one week of publication of the grade.
(b) Re-evaluation of examination or semester papers is normally not allowed. In
exceptional case a student concerned should appeal with reason for re-evaluation to
the Dean (Academics) within two weeks of the publication of the grade. The Dean
(Academics) will forward the request to the faculty concerned. In case, if a student is
not satisfied with the decision of the Instructor, s/he can appeal to the Academic
Committee through the Dean (Academics) within 2 days of receiving the professor’s
decision. Should a re-evaluation be done, the student concerned would have to accept
the decision of the instructor/Dean (Academics).
(c) No request for re-evaluation will be considered under any circumstances less than
fifteen days before the Convocation. If an exception has to be made the concerned
student will not be eligible to receive his/her Degree in the forthcoming convocation
and will also not be eligible to figure in the merit list of his/her class or of the next
graduating class. S/he will likewise be deprived of any medal awarded for excellence
in any segment of the Program.
8.6 NECESSARY QUALIFYING CRITERIA
(a) Where a student has missed an end semester examination due to absence with
prior permission of (or intimation to) the Dean (Academics), s/he should arrange with
the Instructor concerned a make-up examination to be conducted by the Controller of
Examination at the next semester end examinations.
(b) Uninformed absence in the end semester examination will fetch ‘F’ grade in that
segment or in that course.
(c) End semester examination (for theory papers) will be pen and paper based. In case
of any student missed the end term exam for a genuine reason, s/he may be given
chance for a re-test at the end of semesters 2, 4, and 6 after paying the prescribed reexamination fee.
(d) If a student fails to make-up missed-out end semester examination(s) within the
time specified as above, s/he will be awarded ‘F’ grade for that course or for that

segment of evaluation. Dean’s Office shall refer the list of such cases to the faculty
concerned. No arrangements thereafter will be made for a re-test.
8.7 MODE OF CONDUCTING EXAMINATION
Examinations such as quiz, mid semester and end semester examination may be
conducted both in offline and online mode. A student is supposed to be in full
preparedness to appear the examination in both online and offline mode.
i. Under offline mode, a student will appear the examination in examination hall.
The end semester examination must be pen and paper based i.e. in offline
mode. However, under exceptional conditions, the end semester examination
may be conducted in online mode with the approval of the Dean (Academics).
ii. The Online examination may be through AIS or through any electronic media.
The student may also require appearing the examination by installing web
camera.
8.8 EXAMINATION AND DECLARATION OF RESULT
i.

Publication of result: The final semester examination of each program will be
published within 30 days of the completion of the examination.

ii.

Pass Mark: A student must secure minimum grade point of 5 (equivalent to
Letter grade – C) in individual courses to pass a semester.

iii.

SGPA – A student must secure minimum SGPA of 5 in order to pass in a
semester

iv.

CGPA – A student must secure minimum CGPA of 5 in order to graduate in a
program

v.

Award of Honours: A student must secure minimum grade point of 5.5 in
aggregate in Core Courses and Discipline Specific Electives courses to be
awarded Honours in a particular stream. However, the name of the courses to
be taken for award of Honours will be notified to the students by the Dean’s
office.

vi.

Distinction: A student securing final CGPA of 7 and above in aggregate shall
be awarded Distinction.

vii.

Ranks and Medals: Ranks and medals will be only awarded to those students
who have passed the entire course in the first attempt.

viii.

A student who has not secured an aggregate of SGPA of 5 in a semester shall
have to repeat the entire semester. However, if s/he has secured more than 6
Grade point in a particular course then s/he will be exempted for re-appearing
in that course though s/he has failed to secure the aggregate in a semester.

8.9 SUPPLEMENTARY, SPECIAL EXAMINATION AND NUMBER OF
CHANCES
i. If a student is marked ‘absent’ in any sitting(s) of an examination, then such a
student shall have to appear in that course(s) for declaration of her/ his result.
The semester or final result will not be declared for a student who has remained
absent (including those who have been debarred) in any of the course in the end
semester examination.
ii. A student failing to secure a minimum of grade point of 5 in a course(s) may be
allowed to appear in those course(s) in a supplementary examination for not
more than two chances to clear the backlog paper(s) on payment of prescribed
fees. The supplementary examination schedule shall be announced by the
Controller of Examination office.
iii. A student will appear supplementary examination which will be a
comprehensive one and the examination will be conducted for full mark of the
course and will cover the entire syllabus of the course.
iv. Special examination will be conducted with the approval of the Dean
(Academics) in case of grave personal tragedy or hospitalization of the student.
The student has to approach the Controller of Examinations for conduct of
special examination after it has been approved by the Dean (Academics) of the
school. The special examination will be conducted for the component that the
student has missed.
v. In case of a student repeating a course, his/ her latest mark will be considered.
vi. A student who is debarred due to shortage of attendance will not be allowed in
the semester examination as well as the supplementary examination following
semester examination. However, he/she will be allowed to appear the said
examination with the junior batch students. A debarred student will be allowed
to appear for two more chances to clear the paper.
vii. A student can not avail the supplementary chance if he / she has not appeared in
the end-sem. examination of that semester. Students, in their own interest, are
required to appear in all quizzes, and examinations as per schedule.
viii. The first Supplementary examination will be conducted within one month of
publication of result. On failing in first supplementary, the student will be
allowed to appear for second supplementary with the junior batch of students.
ix. A student has to register for supplementary examination within one month of the
publication of result by paying the prescribed fees which is Rs.1000/- for first
chance and Rs.2000/- for appearing the second supplementary.
Re-admission: Any student who has discontinued his/her studies for more than 2
consecutive semesters cannot seek re-admission. However, under extra-ordinary cases
such students may be allowed re-admission with the approval of Registrar.

8.10 CODE OF CONDUCT DURING EXAMINATION
The university attaches great importance to proper conduct of a student during
examinations i.e. quizzes, mid semester and end semester. The code of conduct is
applicable to both online and offline examinations. It is expected that all students will
behave in a responsible manner and will refrain from any unethical practices. Any
deviation from the prescribed code of conduct will be seriously viewed and
punishment as laid in the Examination rule will be imposed on the erring student. A
student at Xavier University must abide herself/ himself to the following ‘code of
conduct’ during examinations
i. A student should report at the examination hall at least 15 minutes before the
scheduled time of the exam. A student will not be ordinarily allowed into
examination hall after the starting of the examination. However, under no
circumstance a student will be allowed into the examination hall after 10
minutes of the commencement of examination.
ii. Each student is expected to bring their own writing equipment/aid including
ruler, calculator, etc., into the examination hall, as permitted by the Instructor.
Exchanging/borrowing of writing equipment/aid from other examinees is not
permitted at any time during the examination. Any violation of this code will
be considered as a serious offence. However, the invigilator may help a
student to acquire a pen or pencil if required, without disturbing other
students.
iii. Carrying of mobile phones or any electronics device including smart watch
into the examination hall is strictly prohibited. Students are not allowed to
keep mobile phones / electronics gadget with them even in switched off or
silent mode during examination. If a student has any electronics gadget/
mobile phone with him/her then she/he must deposit it with the invigilators
before the examination begins. Invigilators may receive the mobile phones,
but the invigilator will not be held responsible for loss of any phone. Students
are, therefore advised to refrain from carrying phones to the examination hall.
If necessary, students shall be frisked and then be allowed inside the exam
hall. If any student is found with a mobile phone in the examination hall, then
punishment as laid down in this rule will be imposed.
iv. All tests are “closed book” unless explicitly specified otherwise by the faculty
concerned with prior intimation to the Dean’s Office and the Controller of
Examinations Office. No paper, books, or notes, etc. are allowed into the
examination hall, except when the test is declared to be “open-book”.
v. Any notes/incriminating documents found in possession or recovered from
students or any exchange of remarks, notes or purposeful gestures, or glances
at another student’s paper in the examination hall will be considered as an
attempt to cheat and will be treated as a malpractice. The invigilator will
report this to the Controller of Examinations in the prescribed form where
both the student and the invigilator are required to sign. The invigilator can

take away the answer paper temporarily or ask the students to change the seat
or take any other suitable action as deemed fit.
vi. Except for essential communication with the invigilator, a student is not
permitted to communicate in any form with anyone during the examination.
Passing or receiving information in any form or peeping into the answer books
of others during the examination constitutes misconduct and is strictly
prohibited. A student, who assists or abets giving or passing of information, in
any form whatsoever, will be considered as guilty and punishable as the one
receiving it.
vii. No student will be allowed to go to washroom during examination particularly
if the examination is less than 60 minutes. However, in case of any exigencies
only, the student may be allowed to go to washroom by the invigilator, but this
will be after recording the time by the invigilator.
viii. Only one person at a time will be allowed to go out of the examination hall to
the washrooms. The invigilator will monitor the students and may record the
time taken by the student in the washroom.
ix. Students must fill the particulars such as name, roll no., etc. on the cover page
of the answer booklet as soon as it is distributed, before proceeding to answer
any question. The same will be the case with every additional booklet used.
x. Students must stop writing, as soon as the invigilator signals the end of the
time allotted for the examination.
xi. No examinee will be allowed to leave the examination hall before submitting
the answer sheet personally to the invigilator.
xii. Any action to undermine the seriousness of examinations such as appearing in
fancy dress during the examinations shall not be allowed.
xiii. Any violation of the norms of examination will be considered a serious
offence and an act of misconduct and will be reported in the prescribed format
by the invigilator to the Controller of Examinations for necessary action.
xiv. In case of any violation of the code of conduct, appropriate action will be
taken as mentioned below.
xv. An Examination Disciplinary Committee (EDC) will be constituted to look
into any violation that is reported.

xvi. The EDC will comprise of the Controller of Examinations, the Dean
(Academics) of the concerned School and the Dean (Academics) of another
school. The concerned faculty member, in whose paper there is an allegation of
misconduct, may be invited to be a part of the EDC.
xvii. An illustrative list of the kinds of penalties that may be imposed in case of
misconduct during examinations are listed below. The EDC may decide to
impose penalties depending on the nature and seriousness of the misconduct
8.11 PENALTIES IMPOSED FOR MISCONDUCT IN THE EXAMINATION
The EDC after conducting the inquiry may recommend the following punishments.
However, the student concerned must be heard by the EDC before imposing the
punishment.
OFFENCE

PUNISHMENT

Talking to another student in the Warning by the invigilators and
examination hall. (both in offline/ online immediate change of seat.
exam.)
On second recurrence, the invigilator
will
report
to
Controller
of
Examinations.
The
Examination
Disciplinary Committee (EDC) may
impose a penalty of deduction of marks
up to 50%, secured in that course.

Possession of chits/ notes/ books/ copies Examination of the particular course
or any unauthorized materials relating to may be cancelled.
the exam.
The EDC may impose a penalty of
deduction up to 50% marks secured in
that course.
If charge is found to be serious enough
then the student will be imposed a
penalty of “I” (Incomplete)”. S/he will
have to clear the paper in the next
available semester/ semester along with
the junior batch.
Possessing mobile phone in switched off The EDC may recommend for 50%mode during examination.
mark deduction in that course.

Browsing through mobile phone or Examination of the particular course
mobile phone in switched on mode may be cancelled.

during examination
If charge is found to be serious enough
then the student may be imposed a
penalty of “I” (Incomplete)”. S/he will
have to clear the paper in the next
available semester/ semester with the
junior batch.
Impersonation

Entire examination of both the
students is to be cancelled after an
investigation into the matter. The
student will be imposed a penalty of “I”
(Incomplete S/he will have to clear the
paper in the next available semester/
semester along with the junior batch.
The EDC may recommend for
suspension of the student from
University.

Misbehavior
invigilator.

in

any

form

towards Examination of the particular course
may be cancelled.
The EDC may deduct up to 50% of
marks. If the charge is found to be
serious enough then EDC may also
impose a penalty of “I” (Incomplete
S/he will have to clear the paper in the
next available semester/ semester along
with the junior batch.

Refusal to give written statement about Examination of the particular course
the incident when demanded by may be cancelled with a scope to repeat
examination related officer/invigilator.

Misbehavior to any officer/staff Examination of the particular course
associated with examination.
may be cancelled.
The EDC may deduct 50% of marks. If
the charge is found to be serious enough
then EDC may also impose a penalty of
“I” (Incomplete S/he will have to clear
the paper in the next available semester/
semester along with the junior batch.

Unauthorized use of any other type of The EDC may recommend for 50%electronics device / media.
mark deduction of the secured mark.

In addition to the above punishment for the offence, the EDC may also impose
following penalties.
a. Monetary fine up to Rs. 5000/b. Informing the parents / guardians of the concerned student.
c. Informing to the higher authority of Xavier University Bhubaneswar for
further action.
8.12 ADMISSION TO HIGHER CLASS AND SEMESTER
i. A student who has secured required percentage of grades/ attendance in the
lower semester will be promoted to the next higher class.
ii. A student will not be promoted to a 3rd semester (2nd Year) if he has 4 full
credit back-papers in 1st and 2nd Semester.
iii. A student will not be promoted to a 5th Semester (3rd Year) if he has 4 full
credit back-papers in 3rd and 4th Semester.
8.13 DEGREE AND TRANSCRIPTS
a. At the end of the sixth/fourth semester, the Degree will be awarded to those
who have fulfilled all the conditions and requirements for the award of degree.
b. Successful students will be awarded degree on the University’s Annual
Convocation day. All students who qualify for the Degree are expected to
attend the Convocation. Under exceptional conditions the degree certificate
may be sent to the student by post/ courier.
c. The award of Degree shall be withheld for non-payment of dues and nonsettlement of accounts with the University or any establishment functioning
under the University.
d. A student may be issued Provisional degree certificate after the successful
completion of the program but before the issue of final degree certificate.
8.13.1 Duplicate Transcript/Degree:
In case of loss of original Degree/Transcript, a duplicate copy can be obtained
on submission of a court affidavit and on payment of fees as applicable at the
time of application. The application is to be addressed to the Registrar, Xavier
University Bhubaneswar.

8.14 MEDALS
For outstanding academic/all-round performance, medals are presented at the time of
the Convocation; subject to the condition that the award-winning student has qualified
for the Degree and has not violated the academic discipline of the program at any time
during his/her tenure at the University. Vice-Chancellor reserves the right to award
medals.
•
•

Vice Chancellor’s medal for the best all-rounder
Vice Chancellor’s medal for academic excellence

8.14.1 Selection criteria for University medals
a) Student should not have failed in any course during his/her entire academic
program.
b) Student should not have any history of indiscipline during the program and
also not subjected to the disciplinary action by the Dean
(Academics)/University Disciplinary Committee.
9. USE OF XCOMM STUDIOS / COMPUTER LAB / EDITING LAB
9.1 PROCEDURE FOR USING AUDIO- VIDEO STUDIOS
All the students are expected to follow the policy/rules of the studios/lab prescribed
by the Dean (Academics)/Studio in-charge. Students can use the studios and lab
facilities for learning and enhancement of knowledge and skills. Any student who
wants to use the audio or video studio outside the teaching hours or for any practical
work, has to sign the Equipment Use Contract/Facility Use Contract, which is
available at the equipment office. This must be duly approved by the Dean
(Academics), XCOMM/ in-charge of Studios. Students are allowed to take/use
equipments inside or out of studio only after obtaining the written permission through
contract form.
9.2 USE OF COMPUTER LAB
Besides the class hours, any student using computer lab has to make an entry in the
‘lab record’ his/her entry and exit time. No student is permitted to take away any
software, hardware or any part of any equipment outside of the lab or to manipulate
the settings of the systems or software. No one will be allowed to copy any of the
materials/media content for either news feature or short fiction film for any other
purpose from either the computers or hard discs.
9.2.1 When in Computer Lab
Do’s
•

Write down proper information in the log register and sit in the allocated
computer systems only. Login (Open the computer system) with proper
credentials (user – STUDIO).

•

Maintain silence inside the lab. Mobile phones should be in Silent/Switch off
mode. Keep your Bags/Books outside the lab.

•

Maintain discipline and do your allocated task only. Properly turn off the
computer system and any Bluetooth device (Keyboard & Mouse) when you
leave the lab.

•

Use your personal Pen Drive/Hard Drive for any project.

Don’ts
•

No food or beverages allowed in the lab. No personal Laptops/Tablets/Mobile
phones/Bags are allowed inside the lab.

•

Do not change any settings/Files of the computer system. Do not create any
folder or files on any systems.

•

Do not browse any Malicious/Forbidden sites in the lab. Do not install or
download any software or modify or delete any system files on any lab
computers.

•

Access to social networking sites in the lab is strictly prohibited unless
directed by the faculty teaching a particular course.

•

Do not place any project file on the desktop of the system.

9.2.2 Use of studio equipment/ Studios and Lab Policy
a) Any student, who wants to use any equipment for his/her individual or group
practical/assignment outside the studio, is expected to follow the procedure
stated in: 9.2.1
b) Reservation of studio for project works should be made two days in advance.
Requests for studio booking has to be routed through faculty teaching that
course. Last minute reservations and requests will be made upon availability
and at faculty/staff discretion.
c) The following is the usual priority for facility use: academic, co-curricular and
productions Sometimes this priority will be changed upon discretion of the
/Dean (Academics)/ in-charge of studio.
d) Students are only allowed to checkout equipment that they have received
training on, either within classes, formal workshops, or self-scheduled
sessions with the technical staff.
e) Equipment can only be checked in and out Monday through Saturday,
between 9 am – 5 pm, or by appointment. Equipment can be checked out for
only one day at a time. Equipment that has not been requested by other users

can be renewed, but students must bring equipment physically back to the
equipment office during checkout hours to be inspected by the staff.
f) No student is permitted to keep any equipment, parts of equipment, software
or hardware under their custody. However, exceptions can be considered only
in consultation with the Dean (Academics) and the Studio in-charge. The
equipment taken out of the studio or lab should be returned by the prescribed
time to the lab technician. If any student is to return the equipment, s/he will
have to pay a fine of Rs. 500/- per hour.
g) It is the responsibility of all borrowers to inspect equipment upon checkout to
ensure it is in proper condition and contains all accessories – if damaged or
missing parts are not identified upon checkout, it will be assumed to have
occurred during the user’s possession.
h) Borrowers are expected to return equipment in the same condition they
received it. If equipment is returned in damaged or incomplete condition due
to student neglect, or not returned at all, student(s) will be charged appropriate
replacement costs for the equipment, and subsequent borrowing and usage
privileges will be suspended until charges have been billed. The decision of
the Dean (Academics) will be final and binding.
i) No student is permitted to bring non-XCOMM members inside the audio or
video studio or computer lab to undertake any work of the student or part of
the work taken up by the student. However, entry to the studio will be allowed
only if they come as artists/performers as part of the project as and when
necessary in consultation with the project in-charge, Dean (Academics) and
the Studio in-charge.
j) Negligent and unprofessional use of equipment violating these policies will
have a direct impact on grades of the courses with a production component.
9.2.3 Use of Studio Floor
a) ABSOLUTELY NO FOOD, DRINKS, SMOKING, GUM CHEWING will be
allowed inside the studio, action area, production control room, green room,
edit suites, audio studio and voice booth. If there is a need for dramatic
purposes for drinking (water), smoking, gum chewing, or pets, seek approval
from the Dean (Academics)/studio in-charge in advance.
b) Items are not to be affixed to the studio walls and/or screens. No writing on
the walls, windows or screens. For the dramatic purposes, attaching any items,
pictures, posters, banners etc., to the lighting grid, requires prior notice and
staff assistance. Items are to be attached at the beginning of a scheduled period
and they must be removed at the end of that scheduled period.
c) Heavy items are not to be dragged over the floors. Handle all the equipments
inside the studio carefully.

d) Spraying of any kind is not allowed in the studios, i.e.: hair spray, dulling
spray, painting etc. All cue tape marks on the floors are to be carefully
removed at the end of the scheduled period.
e) If you bring in personal props, costumes, etc. they must be removed at the end
of the scheduled period. Ask for assistance if at all unsure about how to
interconnect any studio equipment.
f) After individual or class use, studios will be inspected. Any failure to follow
the proper use & care will be treated as violation. If violations are repeated,
the violator(s) will not be allowed to use the facilities in future.
10. PAYMENT OF FEES
10.1 Students shall pay the prescribed fees before the day of registration as instructed
in the admission offer letter. Students have to produce fee payment slip during the
time of registration. Anyone failing to produce the fee payment slip on the day of
registration will not be allowed to register for the program. Fee refund rules will be
applicable as per the admission offer letter.
10.2 The fees of the University are usually announced in the Admission Bulletin or
Admission Call letter. However, the fee structure is liable to changes as and when
necessary through appropriate notification. Fees for each Academic year must be paid
by the due date specified in the Academic Calendar. Student who fails to pay the fee
prior to the prescribed date of registration, a late payment fee of Rs. 500/- per day will
be charged, subject to a total of maximum Rs. 5000/- (five thousand).
10.3 There are banks that will be ready to give education loans to study in our
University. School may issue admission confirmation letter with fee details to the
applicant/bank, if necessary.
10.4 In order to get the payment receipt you may mail to fee@xub.edu.in with your
payment details or collect the receipt from Xavier University Bhubaneswar Accounts
Office.
10.5 A student doing extra credit-elective(s), over and above the prescribed credits,
will be required to pay a fee as notified by the Dean’s Office at the beginning of the
elective year. A late payment fine will be chargeable in case of payment made after
the due date.
10.6 Penalty for Default in Payment of Fees: Students will not be allowed to register
for the term if s/he has not paid the fees for the academic year.
10.7 No certificate of any kind or Degree will be issued to a student who has not
cleared his/her dues. A No Dues Certificate (NDC) form can be obtained from the
Accounts Office and the clearance is to be obtained in written endorsement thereupon,
from Library, Mess/Canteen, Reception, Accounts. The duly completed NDC is to be
submitted to the Dean’s Office, before the student leaves the Campus after the
completion of the sixth semester and fourth semester examinations.

10.2 Refund of Caution Deposit
(a) Caution deposit will be released only after the clearance of all dues and after
obtaining the degree certificate.
(b) Irrespective of the reasons for withdrawal of the student from the University’s
rolls before completion of the program, voluntary or otherwise, no other fees
deposited with the University except the caution deposit is refundable.
11. MISCELLANEOUS
11.1 Railway Concession: Student’s railway concession certificates are issued by the
Dean’s Office to full time students (who in age are not older than 24 years and are not
wage-earners or housewives) only for going home or for summer placement training
during vacations. Concession orders will be issued only during the vacation of the
University. The student’s concession is not to be given before the vacation
commences.
The term ‘home’ denotes – “The place where the parent (or if no parent is alive, the
student’s guardian) normally resides. When the parent is alive, the question of using
the concession for visiting the ‘guardian’ does not arise.”
11.2 Air travel Concession: Concession forms may be obtained from the Indian
Airlines Office and submitted to the Dean’s Office for certification, after affixing a
passport size photograph of the applicant. Eligibility rules for air concessions are the
same as for Railway Concessions mentioned in 11.1 above.
11.3 Extra Curricular Activities
The University encourages students to participate in extra and co-curricular activities
for the all-round growth in addition to academic accomplishments. Enough scope
exists in the Campus for extra-curricular pursuits such as sports, social service, book
club, music, seminars, debates, quizzes and contests, area specific drives, etc.
11.4 General
11.4.1 The Administration of Xavier University Bhubaneswar reserves the right to
change requirements for admissions or graduation, content of courses, fees charged,
scholarships, awards and regulations affecting students, or make any other suitable
modification, should they be deemed necessary in the interest of the students, the
University or the profession.
11.4.2 Each student is responsible for his/her belongings like laptop, Cameras, or any
other electronic items. The School of Communications is not responsible for any loss
or theft in the campus. The responsibility for the loss/theft lies on the students.
11.4.3 Dress Code: Students are expected to come to class decently dressed with
business casuals/smart casuals. For presentations/guest talks and special events
(conferences, conclave, seminars etc.) students are expected to come in
formals/business formals.

12. CAREER ADVISORY SERVICES & INTERNSHIP COMMITTEE
a. Career Advisory Services & Internship Committee is purely a student driven
activity, assisted by the faculty mentors. The Career Advisory Services &
Internship Committee office assists the students in planning their internships
and industry experience.
b. Although the University shall make every attempt to facilitate the process of
getting each student an internship, which may match one’s interest, it cannot
be taken as a matter of right.
c. As a matter of policy, the academic work of the students will take precedence
over other activities.
13. FACULTY
RESIDENT FACULTY
Dr V. Vijay Kumar, Dean (Academics) - Acting
Fr Alwyn Rodrigues, SJ
Dr Anamika
Ms. Arpita Saha
Dr Jyoti Ranjan Sahoo
Dr Nadira Khatun
Mr. Nirmalya Baral
Dr Purnima Anjali Mohanty
TECHNICAL STAFF
Mr. Pramod Saha, Technical and Production Assistant
Mr. Ratiram Khakha, Technical Assistant
VISITING FACULTY
Mr. Amit Sen, Film Director, Kolkata
Ms. Anu Sinha, Head, Department of Advertising & Marketing, XIC, Mumbai
Mr. Anupam Barve, Filmmaker, Mumbai
Mr. Ashijit Ganguli, FTII, Cinematographer, Kolkata
Mr. Ashoke Viswanathan, FTII, Film Director, Actor & Film Critic, Kolkata
Mr. Dhrubajyoti Pramanik, Senior Editor, TV 18 Broadcast Limited, Kolkata
Mr. G.S. Manju Rathan, Video Editor & Graphic Designer, Chennai
Dr George Vallocheril, SJ, Visiting Faculty, Marquette University, USA
Mr. Hudson Taylor, Sound Engineer, Hyderabad
Mr. John Livingstone, Visual & Image Editor, Hyderabad
Ms. Jyoti Mishra, Senior Anchor, India TV, Delhi
Dr K. P. Shreekumar, Event Management, Pune
Mr. Luke Mendes, XIC, Mumbai
Mr. Nimesh Vohra, Arts & Aesthetics, Bangalore
Ms. Novena Bothaju, PR & Corp. Communication Practitioner, Cuttack
Mr. Pradyuman Maheshwari, Editor in Chief and CEO, MxM India, Mumbai

Mr. Rajat Ghosh, Ace Photographer, Mumbai
Mr. Satyanarayan Mahopatra, Graphic Designer, Bhubaneswar
Ms. Shruti Bora, Film & Video Editor, Mumbai
Mr. Velu Shankar, Media Consultant, Tamilnadu
14. CONTACT INFORMATION
Off.
Tel.
Ext.

Mobile No.

Dr V. Vijay Kumar

99520 05677

Fr Alwyn Rodrigues, SJ
Dr Anamika
Ms. Arpita Saha
Dr Jyoti Ranjan Sahoo
Dr Nadira Khatun
Mr. Nirmalya Baral
Dr Purnima A. Mohanty
Mr. Pramod Saha
Mr. Ratiram Khakha
Ms. Caroline D’Costa
XCOMM Dean’s Office
Controller of
Examination

89174 29822
78944 66164
74400 60084
72910 24532
97694 75038
95335 99399
88952 70708
82606 48221
99377 60950
99374 20362
63707 04394

deancomm@xub.edu.in/
vijaykumarvijayan@xcomm.edu.in
alwynsj@xcomm.edu.in
anamika@xub.edu.in
arpita@xcomm.edu.in
jyotiranjan@xub.edu.in
nadira@xcomm.edu.in
nirmalya@xub.edu.in
purnima@xub.edu.in
pramodpin2@gmail.com
ratiram@xcomm.edu.in
caroline@xub.edu.in
deancomm_office@xub.edu.in

0674-237 7710

coe_office@xub.edu.in

Registrar’s Office

7889 0674-237 7889

Name

Email

registrar_office@xub.edu.in

New Campus
Plot No. 12(A), Nijagada Kurki
P.O. Harirajpur -752050, Dt. Puri, Odisha, India
Phone: +91-674-2377700 (Pilot Number)
Website: https://www.xub.edu.in