Student Manual of Policies
Undergraduate Programmes
(Effective from 1st July 2023)

XIM University
Bhubaneswar

Contents
Enforcement
Sl. No.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY
I
II
III

SECTION -A
XIM UNIVERSITY
VISION, MISSION & VALUES
CULTURE
PROGRAMME OVERVIEW
ACADEMIC PROGRAMMES DETAILS
REGISTRATION
SCHOLARSHIP
FEES
CURRICULUM DESIGN
TEACHING METHODOLOGY
ONLINE/DIGITAL PEDAGOGY
CLASS TIMINGS
ATTENDANCE
LIBRARY
ELIGIBILITY TO APPEAR END SEMESTER EXAMINATION
LEAVE OF ABSENCE
COMPONENTS OF EVALUATION
EXAMINATION AND DECLARATION OF RESULTS
GRADING AND COMPUTATION OF SGPA & CGPA
GRADING PATTERN FOR BA/BBA LLB (HONS.)
AWARD OF HONOURS
MEDALS
DISCIPLINE
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE
DISCIPLINARY COMMITTEE
PENALTY
RAGGING
PROHIBITION OF BODY SHAMING
PROTECTION OF RIGHTS /DIGNITY OF MEMBERS OF LGBTQIA+ COMMUNITY
PROHIBITION OF CYBER BULLYING AND CYBER HARASSMENT
PRINT AND VISUAL MEDIA, AND SOCIAL MEDIA POLICIES
DRESSING FORMALITY

Page

NARCOTIC AND ALCOHOLIC ABUSE DETERRENCE POLICY
GRIEVANCE RESOLUTION
STUDENT PERFORMANCE FEEDBACK
COURSE FEEDBACK BY THE STUDENTS
STUDENT TRAVEL CONCESSIONS
GRIEVANC E- APPEALS AND REDRESSALS
SECTION – B
VALUE ADDED-PROGRAMMES
RURAL SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT PROGRAMME
NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)
MAGIS EXCHANGE PROGRAMME
INTERNSHIP
USE OF AUDIO-VISUAL STUDIOS, DIGITAL PHOTOGRAPHIC STUDIOS,
AUDIO STUDIOS, MULTIMEDIA LABORATORY AND EDITING LAB
CODE OF CONDUCT FOR THE STUDENTS DURING EXAMINATION
LIST OF EXAMINATION MALPRACTICES AND PENALTIES
PROCEDURE TO DEAL WITH CASES OF MALPRACTICES
EXAMINATION DISCIPLINARY ISSUES
SECTION – C
PROGRAMME STRUCTURE AND COURSE LIST
BA (HONS.) PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION & GOVERNANCE
B.SC. (HONS.) ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
B.SC. (HONS.) SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
B.SC. (HONS.) ECONOMICS
B.SC. (HONS.) MASS COMMUNICATION
B.COM. (HONS.) ACCOUNTING
B.COM. (HONS.) FINANCE
B.B.M (HONS.) HR
B.B.M (HONS.) MARKETING
B.TECH. (HONS.) COMPUTER SCIENCE & ENGINEERING
B.A. LL. B (HONS.)
B.B.A. LL. B (HONS.)
B.A. ENGLISH (HONS.)
B.A. PSYCHOLOGY (HONS.)
SECTION - D
SCHOOL WISE CONTACT DETAILS

SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY

The Manual of Policies (MoP) for students comes into effect for a student from the date of
registration in the University. The rules or policies prescribed in the manual are applicable
to all students who are registered and pursuing undergraduate programmes under XIM
University, without prejudice to any actions or decisions already taken in the previous
Academic year and also without prejudice to any special rules framed or to be framed with
regard to examination, student's residence (hostel), library etc. Every Student must secure a
copy of the “Manual of Policies” and carefully go through the prescribed rules and policies.
Onus of ignorance will be on the student and will not be a ground for any consideration
under any circumstances.
Disclaimer: The statements made in this Student Manual of Policies and all other
information, contained herein are believed to be correct at the time of publication. However,
the University reserves the right to make any changes in and additions to the policies and
regulations, condition governing the conduct of students, requirements for degree, fees and
any other information or statements contained in this Manual from time to time. No
responsibility will be accepted by the University for hardship or expense encountered by its
students or any other person for such changes, additions, omissions or errors, no matter how
they are caused.

Registrar
XIM University

SECTION-1
I.

XIM UNIVERSITY

A Digital University, A Research University, A Jesuit University, An Innovative University,
A University with a Vision.
Xavier University was established on July 6, 2013. On 3rd April 2021, the Xavier
University, Odisha (Amendment) Act 2021 was passed in the Odisha Legislative
Assembly, renaming Xavier University as XIM University. Thus, the Gazette
Notification was published on 11th of May 2021. As per its provisions the
University has its main campus in Nijigada Kurki, Harirajpur, in Puri District, and
an additional campus at Xavier Square, Bhubaneswar, where the Xavier Institute of
Management functions.
With the passage of time and based on the experience acquired over the past seven
years, the management and Board of Governors of Xavier University,
Bhubaneswar, believe that the name 'Xavier University,' Odisha Act, 2013 should
be replaced with 'XIM' University, Odisha Act. The University had to be renamed to
keep the 'XIM' brand name, which had been known in the country and around the
world for 36 years since its inception in 1987. Students who receive a certificate
bearing the 'XIM' brand name will find better career prospects in the country and
abroad. The business, corporations, transformation leaders, and the growth sectors
all recognize this brand. XIM has brought laurels, prestige, and honour to the state of
Odisha and has served the state and the nation through its extensive network and
relationships.
Currently, XIM University views itself as a distinguished university that provides
quality education to top-notch students worldwide. The XIM University inherits the
legacy of the 36-year-old XIM (Xavier Institute of Management, Bhubaneswar),
the country's premier, world-class B-School. XIM University's identity is described
by its ethic of 'men and women for and with others'. Our faculty, staff, and students
represent diverse faiths and identities, but we all aspire to be men and women for
and with others. What else distinguishes a Jesuit XIM University? Our students are
taught the value of experience, curiosity, global experiences, and 'cura personalis',
which translates to 'care for the whole person'. There is a strong intention to be the
first to respond to society's needs and encourage sustainable societies that motivate
the state and country's futures, acting as a change agent. Education for moral
character, adaptability, world affirmation and faith that serves justice are all
hallmarks of this philosophy. With a small start in 1987 in management education,
XIM University now has 12 schools offering doctoral, masters, and undergraduate
programmes. We are committed to working relentlessly as XIM University to
ensure that the world receives a high-quality, all-around development education
from Odisha.

II.

VISION, MISSION AND VALUES

VISION
“To be a leading global Jesuit university, innovative in academia, grooming
compassionate and resilient leaders to lead organizations for a just, equitable and
sustainable society”.
MISSION
In the spirit of Magis, XIM University strives to:
·

Promote innovation in learning and the total ecosystem

·

Nurture multidisciplinary thinking and lead next practice research

·

Serve society by empowering all sections of society

·

Lead digital thinking in social and developmental issues

·

Establish trust in the higher education arena

VALUES
·

Integrity

·

Excellence

·

Inclusiveness

·

Compassion

·

Sustainability

III.

CULTURE
The faculty, the students and the administration of XIM University contribute to the
building up of an organizational culture marked by esprit de corps, confidence, and
mutual respect, concern for others' needs, hard work, social values, personal
maturity and integrity. The University's culture is that the students be at ease and
confident in dealing with people in all walks of life.
PROGRAM OVERVIEW

All the UG Programmes of XIM University are full-time / regular in nature. Regular classes
happen inside the campus. However, if a force majeure event such as typhoon, cyclone,
epidemic, pandemic or any other act of God which cannot be foreseen, the classes and
examinations may happen in on-line or hybrid mode.
All UG programmes have their unique course structure, a student admitted to a particular
program need to attain a minimum pass mark to successfully complete the programme.

A course in the UG Programmes may be of two to six credits. One credit is equivalent to 10
teaching/contact hours. In most cases any course will have 4-5 scheduled sessions/classes
per week. Exceptions are made to accommodate visiting faculty or other exigencies.
SEMESTER SYSTEM →
All Undergraduate Programmes of the XIM University follow the semester system. The
semester system has six semesters in three years except B.Tech. (Hons.) Computer Science
& Engineering with eight semester, B.A. LL. B (Hons.) and B.B.A. LL. B (Hons.) with ten
semester i.e., two in each year.
1.

ACADEMIC PROGRAMME DETAILS
The University offers the following undergraduate programmes.
ACADEMIC
PROGRAMMES

SCHOOLS

PROGRAMME
DURATION

ACADEMIC
YEAR

TOTAL
CREDITS

School of Governance
and Public Affairs

3 Years

2023-26

School of
Sustainability

3 Years

2023-26

B.Sc. (Hons.) Economics

School of Economics

3 Years

2023-26

B.Sc. (Hons.) Mass
Communication

School of
Communications

3 Years

2023-26

School of Commerce

3 Years

2023-26

School of Computer
Science and
Engineering

4 Years

2023-27

Xavier Law School

5 Years

2023-28

School of Liberal Arts

3 Years

2023-26

BA (Hons.) Public
Administration &
Governance
B.Sc. (Hons.)
Environmental Science
B.Sc. (Hons.) Sustainable
Development

B.Com. (Hons.)
Accounting / Finance
B.B.M (Hons.)
HR/Marketing
B.Tech. (Hons.) Computer
Science & Engineering
B.A. LL. B (Hons.)
B.B.A. LL. B (Hons..)
B.A. English
B.A. Psychology

???

2.

REGISTRATION

2.1

Students are required to register in person on the day earmarked for registration as
per the admission call letter and thereafter on the first day of each subsequent
semester as indicated in the Academic Calendar.

2.2

A notice will be put up by the Dean's Office for verification of the original
certificates. In case original certificates are not available at the time of verification,
provisional certificates will have to be shown.

2.3

The students, who could not submit their final year +2 mark-sheets from their
respective universities on the day of the verification, should submit them latest by
the day of registration of Semester, failing which a student's registration may be
cancelled.

2.4

In exceptional circumstances, the last date for submission of certificates in support
of the qualifying degree can be extended by the Dean Academics for an appropriate
period in consultation with the Registrar.

2.5

Those who fail to register for each semester after joining the programme on the
specified date as per the calendar will be deemed to have left the programme unless
prior permission is obtained from the Dean Academics. If the Dean permits, a
student can register by paying a late registration fee of ₹ 500/- (rupees five hundred)
per day after the due date subject to a maximum allowance of 10 days for late
registration. The late registration fee is payable irrespective of the reasons or
circumstances for the delay in seeking registration.

2.6

The Registration of a student will remain valid for a period of 5 years including the
Academic Year in which registration was granted for all UG programmes except for
B.Tech and LLB, where the validity will be for a period of 6 and 7 years respectively.

2.7

Registration number of a student will remain unchanged for the entire duration of
the programme. The request for change of sections in class is not honored.

2.8

Re-admission: Any student who has discontinued his/her studies for more than 2
consecutive semesters due to prior approved reasons can seek re-admission with the
approval of the Vice-Chancellor of the University.

3.

SCHOLARSHIP

3.1

The University offers scholarships to provide financial assistance to meritorious,
ST, SC, and EWS/Minority students to meet their educational expenses subject to
fulfillment of necessary conditions.

3.2

Scope: The scholarships will be awarded to the students who, on completion of their
respective +2 Board Examinations, have applied and have been selected for an
undergraduate course in the university for the academic year 2022-23.

3.3

Eligibility: Category A – Merit Scholarship: Students with 90 % marks in aggregate
(for core subjects, refer Annex III available on the website) in 12th Board
Examination or equivalent will be provided scholarship worth 50% of the

course/tuition fee only for 1st year. This offer will be continued only if the student
secures a minimum CGPA of 8.0 (without any back paper) in each of the subsequent
year of the study at the University. Category B - Scholarship for the SC, ST,
EWS/Minority Students: Three students, one each belonging to each of these
categories, will be awarded scholarship worth 50% of the course/tuition fee only in
the first year of the study in the university. This offer will be continued only if the
student secures a minimum CGPA of 7.5 (without any back paper) in each of the
subsequent years of the study at the University.
3.4

The number of such scholarship sanctioned for the aforesaid categories are as
follows:

PROGRAMMES

SC

ST

EBW/MINORITY

B.Com.

BBM

B.Sc.-SD/EVS

B.Tech.-CSE

BA-LLB

BBA-LLB

B.Sc.-MC

B.Sc.-Eco
B.A-PAG

3.5

Category C - Merit scholarship for the topper of the batch: This scholarship,
worth 50% of the course/tuition fee, is given to the topper (highest CGPA) of each of
the undergraduate programmes of the university in the subsequent academic year.

4.

FEES

4.1

The fees of the school are usually announced in the Admission Bulletin or
Admissions Offer letters. However, the fee structure is liable to changes as and
when necessary, through appropriate notification. Fees for each year must be paid
by the due date specified in the Academic Calendar. A late payment fee of ₹ 500/per day is charged in case of a payment made after the due date subject to a total of
maximum of ₹ 5,000/-.

4.2

Penalty for Default in Payment of Fees:

i.

A student will not be allowed to register for the semester if s/he has not paid the fees.

ii.

No certificate of any kind or Degree will be issued to a student who has not cleared
his/her dues. A No Dues Certificate (NDC) form can be obtained from the Accounts
Office and the clearance is to be obtained in written endorsement thereupon, from
Library, Mess , Reception, Accounts. The duly completed NDC is to be submitted to

the Dean's Office before the student leaves the Campus after the completion of the
sixth semester examinations. (Now generated over UMS to ease the process of
collecting NDC).
5.

CURRICULUM DESIGN

5.1

The course curriculum has been designed by a group of experienced academicians
as per the guidelines of UGC /AICTE/BCI. The University may change/modify the
course curriculum to suit the contemporary requirement.

6.

TEACHING METHODOLOGY

6.1

Teaching methodology consists of lecture inputs, exercises, cases, presentations,
dissertation-work, term papers, etc. Each instructor uses a mix of methodologies to
suit the requirements of the course. Students in a course are likewise evaluated in
various components, viz. quiz, mid-semester examination, end-semester
examination, cases, and other assignments. On the commencement of each
semester, the Course Outlines are given to the students, specifying the contents of
the course, the methodology and the norms for evaluation. The students may,
however, check with the instructor if these details are not specified.

7.

ONLINE/DIGITAL PEDAGOGY

7.1

The classes, assessments and examinations are held inside the university campus in
the respective schools through physical mode. However, in the if situation so
demands the classes and the examinations shall be held in the online/digital mode.

7.2

Under special circumstances, XIM University provides the online classroom and all
related materials and assessments solely for your educational purposes, subject to
the following terms and conditions and the sole discretion of the University. The
University may modify these terms and conditions at any time by updating the
Terms of Use before the start of a term.

7.3

Your access to the online academic class/ exam is for your use only to complete your
course requirements. Any use of the online secured site not related to the fulfillment
of class responsibilities and deliverables is prohibited, your credentials (login ID
and password) for access to the online class/ exam/ University Management System
(UMS) should not be shared with anyone for any reason. In no event will XIM
University be liable to you for any incidental, indirect, special, or consequential
damages arising out of your use or improper use of credentials or the materials
provided. All the materials provided to you in the form of soft copy / e-copy are
subject ownership of University's copyright. Infringement of these norms will
follow academic review or disciplinary action.

7.4

In the online/digital mode the students are required to attend the classes/academic
sessions and appear in the examinations by enabling the videos and when it is
required, they need to be in the position to enable the audio (As instructed by the
Faculty/ Instructor).

Tips for taking online classes.
7.4.1

Treat an online class like a “real” face to face class.

7.4.2

Hold yourself accountable for any means of disturbance in the class or exam.

7.4.3

Practice time management.

7.4.4

Eliminate distractions.

7.4.5

Actively participate.

7.4.6

Do not abuse the chat box.

7.4.7

Leverage your network.

7.4.8

Remember, if it is on the internet, it is everywhere.

7.4.9

Respect others' privacy

7.4.10 Do not spam.
7.4.11 Respect the teaching guidelines framed by the University.
8.

CLASS TIMINGS

8.1

All Classes will be held between 9:30 A.M & 5:00 P.M from Monday through
Saturday.

9.

ATTENDANCE

9.1

The university attaches great importance to punctuality and regular attendance of all
class sessions. Students are required to attend a minimum of 75% of classes in all
individual courses. The guidelines mentioned below will be followed in all courses.
A student will be allowed to appear for the end-term examination where s/he has a
minimum of 75% attendance in the course. This is a non – negotiable requirement.
The students and the parents will sign and submit an undertaking to the Deans
Office within the week of the beginning of every academic year. Absence in more
than 25% of classes in a course will disqualify the student from appearing in the End
Term examination of that course. For assessing the eligibility of a student in case of
decimal number, the attendance will be converted to the nearest integer.
In case of absence due to health issues, the office of the dean of the school needs to
be intimated on the first day of such absence. The certificate and document can
never be submitted at the end of the term.

9.2

If a student despite such grant of medical leave, still lacks the required attendance of
75%, grade deduction is done:
75% - 70% = 1
70-65 = 2
65-60 = 3
60-55 = 4

There will be no further appeal on the non-negotiable requirement of 75% attendance.
9.3

Absence in more than 25 % of classes in any 3 courses during a term would require
the student to discontinue and rejoin on the commencement of the same term in the
next academic year.

9.4

REASONS FOR WHICH LEAVE MAY BE GRANTED

9.4.1

As mentioned in 9.1 above, a student may be granted leave of absence. Such leave of
absence will be granted as deemed fit by the Dean, on proper and prior application
by the student, before going on leave, along with appropriate initial/ preliminary
documentary evidence, for good and sufficient reasons. If the student is not
medically fit to write an application, s/he may take the help of parents or guardians
to send the application with medical prescription, GST medicine bills and copies of
medical tests, if any, by email to the Dean and the Dean's Office without fail.

9.4.2

The application should be addressed to the Dean by email with attachments and
submitted in the Office of the Dean, along with relevant documents before availing
the leave. For absence on health grounds, the student must attach:

9.4.2.1 Doctor's prescription with registration number.
9.4.2.2 GST computerized medicine bill and GST computerized test bills
9.4.2.3 Bills of medical tests, if any done
9.4.2.4 And a Medical Fitness Certificate from the doctor for resuming classes.
All subsequent documents post-leave application date must be submitted within
two day of resuming classes, failing which the leave will stand cancelled from the
date of application. Applications on non-medical ground should also be submitted
and permission taken from the Dean prior to going on leave without fail.
9.4.3

Faculty members are not responsible for any student losing any segment of
evaluation because of leave availed by him/her, even if it is with prior permission.
Make-up of class tests, quizzes or assignments is left entirely to the discretion of the
faculty concerned and its due fulfilment is solely the student's responsibility.

9.4.4

9.4.1 to 9.4.3 will not accepted after this grace period of one week of resuming
classes

9.2

The final grade assigned to them takes into account their class participation. It is,

therefore, advised that the students, in their own interest, should not miss any class.
9.3

Written attendance record is taken in each class, or through the University
Management System (UMS).

9.4

Absence without prior permission/intimation for leave from the Dean is considered
to be a serious breach of discipline, and the student is liable for appropriate
disciplinary action, besides reduction in grade points.

9.5

Exemption from attending classes is not permissible for reasons other than personal
physical illness, grave personal tragedy and university work. The provision of 25%
absence is only to accommodate these reasons.

9.6

A student shall not be allowed to appear in the end-semester examination in those
courses where he/she has shortage of attendance below 75%. Attendance record
shall be compiled at the time of mid-semester and end-semester examinations and
the same shall be informed to all students and their parents.

9.7

Any student failing to attend the end semester examination due to shortfall of
attendance will have to appear for the course in the same semester next year with the
junior batch. Final semester students will, therefore, not be able to graduate with
their batch.

10.

LIBRARY

10.1

The library of XIM University plays a vital role in the academic pursuit of student,
faculty and researchers adding to the intellectual vibrancy of the campus. The
library remains hybrid with equal emphasis to print and digital resources. The
library has been developing its resource collections, which include books,
periodicals, databases, e-books, e-journals, audio-visual materials, cases, company
annual reports, working papers & newspapers by using state-of-the-art facilities
over the years. The library provides remote (anywhere/anytime) access to e-books,
e-journals, open archives and other digital resources through the UMS.

10.2

Besides the print resources, library subscribe various national and international eresources in the form of corporate and economic database like EBSCO, ABI,
Proquest Complete, Taylor & Francis, Elsevier Science Direct, JSTOR, J-Gate,
Sage Database, EPWRF, ISI Emerging market, CMIE Prowess, India Stat,
LexisNexis. The library has subscribed BLOOMBERG database & Grammarly
Software. The service and tools provided by the library helps the users to enrich
their research activities and save their time.

10.3

The library assists the teaching community in developing course materials through
its Institutional repository services. In addition to its own resources, XIM
University library offers Reference services, Research support services,
Circulation services, Database training support, User orientation services,
Document delivery, Audio-visual services, Online catalogue/OPAC services, AntiPlagiarism services, Newspaper clipping, Display of new arrivals and

Reprographic services to the user's community.
10.4

The Library Information System is accessible to its users both from within and
outside the campus.

10.5

The Online library portal is accessible across the campus network round the clock.

11.

ELIGIBILITY TO APPEAR FOR END SEMESTER EXAMINATION

11.1

A candidate shall be required to attend at least 75% of the lectures in each of the
course classes taken separately to be eligible to appear for the end semester
examination for a course.

11.2

Please read Section 9 above.

12.

LEAVE OF ABSENCE

12.1

For any leaves as mentioned in section 9.5, the student shall have to seek and obtain
prior permission from the Dean. Such leave of absence may be granted by the Dean
on application along with documentary evidences. Any other types of leaves may be
rejected by the Dean upon his/her sole discretion.

12.2

The application may be addressed to the Dean after obtaining views of the
concerned faculty. Faculties are not responsible for any student losing any segment
of evaluation on account of leave availed by his/her with prior permission, and the
make-up of class tests, which are missed-out due to such absence is left entirely to
the discretion of the faculty.

12.3

Students missing classes due to sickness are required to produce valid medical
certificate along with doctor's prescription and original cash memo for the
medicines purchased.

13.

COMPONENTS OF EVALUATION

Each course will have following evaluation components:

13.1.

SL. NO.

COMPONENTS

SUGGESTED WEIGHTAGE

Quiz

20%

Assignment

10%

Mid-Semester exam

30%

End- Semester exam

40%

The above components are suggestive in nature and the concerned faculty has the
discretion to make changes as may be suitable for a particular course. However, the
component of end-semester examination shall not be less than 40%.

13.2.

Project work / Dissertation / Practical will also be a component for award of final
degree to a student. The evaluation of these courses will not have above
components.

13.3.

The decision of the Dean regarding segment of evaluation of a paper will be final. A
student who needs clarification on his or her grades may discuss with the concerned
faculty/ Dean and Dean's office within a week of receiving the grades.

13.4.

Faculty will give feedback to students periodically on their performance through
written comments on answer sheets or through individual meetings.

14. EXAMINATION AND DECLARATION OF RESULTS
14.1.

Publication of result: The final semester examination of each programme will be
published within 30 days of the completion of the examination or as decided by the
COE.

14.2.

Pass Mark: A student must secure minimum grade point of 5 (equivalent to Letter
grade – C) in individual papers to pass a semester except in XLS which is governed
by the Bar council of India. The pass mark for XLS will be as per the guidelines of
Bar Council of India and this is spelt out in the MOP of the school.

14.3.

SGPA (Semester Grade Point Average) – A student must secure a minimum SGPA
of 5 in order to pass in a semester.

14.4.

CGPA (Cumulative Grade Point Average) – A student must secure minimum CGPA
of 5 in order to graduate in a Programme.

14.5.

Award of Honours - A student must secure minimum grade point of 5.5 in aggregate
in Core Courses and Discipline Specific Electives subjects to be awarded Honours
in a particular stream. However, the name of the courses to be taken for award of
Honours will be notified to the students by the Dean's office.

14.6.

Distinction: A student securing final CGPA of 7 or above in aggregate shall be
awarded Distinction.

14.7.

Ranks and Medals: Ranks and medals will be only awarded to those students who
have passed the entire course in the first attempt. A student securing highest CGPA
shall be awarded gold medal. However, only those candidates who have passed
each semester examination in the first attempt only shall be eligible for award of
ranks. But for this, the student must have secured at least a CGPA of 7. There can be
joint winners if two students secure same highest percentage of marks.

14.8.

Conversion of CGPA into percentage: The final CGPA can be converted to
percentage by the following method: (CGPA - 0.5) ×10 excepting for B.A. (Law)
and BBM (Law). For these Programmes the percentage will be calculated by
multiplying the CGPA with 10).

14.9.

A student who has not secured an aggregate of SGPA of 5 in a semester shall have to
repeat the entire semester with the junior batch. However, if s/he has secured more
than 6 Grade point in a particular paper then s/he will be exempted for re-appearing
in that paper though s/he has failed to secure the aggregate in a semester.

14.10. Degree Requirement - A candidate will be eligible for award of degree if he/she
satisfies all the following:
14.10.1 He / She has no course or paper in which an end-semester or any evaluation
component is pending.
14.10.2 He/ She should have good conduct in and outside the University during the
period of study
14.10.3 He/ She does not have any University Disciplinary Committee process
pending against his/her
14.11

Information and decision/s by the CoE in both email and hard copy are sent to the
Dean and Dean's Office, who in turn intimate the student/s.

15.

GRADING AND COMPUTATION OF SGPA & CGPA
All the undergraduate programmes under XIM University follows a grading pattern
in compliance with CBCS structure of UGC expect BA/BBA LLB (Hons.)
Letter Grade

O

A+

A

B+

B

C

F

Grade Point

9.0-10.0

8.0 8.99

7.0 7.99

6.0 6.99

5.0 5.99

4.0 4.99

0 3.99

Range (percentage
of marks)

i.

Method of Computation of Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA)
The SGPA is the ratio of sum of the product of the number of credits with the grade
points scored by a student in all the courses taken by a student and the sum of the
number of credits of all the courses undergone by a student, i.e.

SGPA (Si) = ∑ (Ci x Gi) / ∑ Ci
Where Ci is the number of credits of the course and Gi is the grade point scored by
the student in the course.
The SGPA and CGPA shall be rounded off to 2 decimal points and reported in the
transcripts.
ii.

Method of Computation of Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA)
The CGPA is also calculated in the same manner taking into account all the courses
undergone by a student over all the semesters of a programme, i.e.

CGPA = ∑ (Ci x Si) / ∑ Ci

Where Si is the SGPA of the semester and Ci is the total number of credits in that
semester. The SGPA and CGPA shall be rounded off to 2 decimal points and
reported in the transcripts.
Illustration of Computation of SGPA and CGPA and Format for Transcripts
Illustration for SGPA
COURSES

CREDIT

GRADE POINT

CREDIT POINT (CREDIT X GRADE)

Course 1
Course 2
Course 3
Course 4
Course 5
Course 6
Total

3x8=24
4x7=28
3x6=18
3x10=30
3x5=15
4x6=24

Thus, SGPA=139/20=6.95
Illustration for CGPA
Semester 1

Semester 2

Semester 3

Semester 4

Semester 5

Semester 6

Credit: 20
SGPA: 6.9

Credit: 22
SGPA:7.8

Credit: 25
SGPA: 5.6

Credit: 26
SGPA: 6.0

Credit: 26
SGPA: 6.3

Credit: 25
SGPA: 8.0

Thus, CGPA= 20x6.9+22x7.8+25x5.6+26x6.0+26x6.3+25x8.0 = 6.73

iii.

Supplementary and Make-Up Examination

1.

If a student is marked 'absent' in any sitting(s) of an examination, then such a student
shall have to appear in that paper(s) in a later semester for declaration of her/ his
result. The semester or final result will not be declared for a student who has
remained absent (including those who have been debarred) in any of the paper in the
end-semester examination. The course will be marked as Incomplete “I”.

2.

A student failing to secure a minimum of grade point of 5 in a course(s) shall be
allowed to appear Make-Up Examination in those course(s) only once to clear the
short grade point paper(s) on payment of prescribed fees. The Make-Up
Examination for a paper of a semester will be held immediately after the end termexaminations of the next semester as mentioned in the Examination Calendar of the
University.

3.

A student will appear for the Make-Up Examination for a paper in which the grade
point is less than 5, will be a comprehensive one and the examination will be
conducted for full 100 marks of the course and will cover the entire syllabus of the
course. The marks so obtained in the Make-Up examination shall be used to
compute the grade point for this course.

4.

Supplementary examination will be conducted with the approval of the Dean in
case of grave personal tragedy or hospitalization of the student. The student has to
approach the Controller of Examinations for conduct of Supplementary
Examination after it has been approved by the Dean of the school. The
Supplementary examination will be conducted for the end term examination that
the student has missed and/or the papers that has been missed. However, if the total
attendance of the student for reasons mentioned here fall below 75%, the student
shall have to take the Supplementary Examination with the junior batch. The
student shall get only one chance to appear for the Supplementary Examination.

5.

In case of a student repeating a paper, his/ her latest mark will be considered.

6.

The Supplementary examination will be conducted in the next Semester. Upon
failing in the Supplementary Examination, a student will be required to repeat the
Semester next academic year with the junior batch and proceed in the program.

7.

A student has to register for supplementary examination within one month of the
publication of result by paying the prescribed fees which is Rs.1000 per
supplementary exam.

8.

Special examination may also be conducted only with the approval of Vice
Chancellor when there is a mass poor performance in a particular paper.

9.

Re-admission: Any student who has discontinued his/her studies for more than 2
consecutive semesters cannot seek re admission in the program in which the batch
in which he registered. However, under extra-ordinary cases such students may be
allowed readmission with the approval of Registrar.

10.

Appellate Authority -Not withstanding what has been stated in this rule, the Vice
Chancellor, XIM University is the appellate authority for all matters.

iv.

Admission to Higher Class and Semester

1.

A student who has secured required percentage of grades/ attendance in the lower
semester will be promoted to the next higher class/semester.

2.

A student will not be promoted to a 3rd semester (2nd Year) if he/ she has 4 back
papers including debarred papers in 1st and 2nd Semester.

3.

A student will not be promoted to a 5th Semester (3rd Year) if he/ she has 4 back
papers debarred papers in 3rd and 4th Semester.

4.

A student will not be promoted to 7th Semester if she/ if he/ she has 4 back papers
debarred papers in 5th and 6th Semester.

v.

Degree and Transcripts

1.

At the end of the sixth/eighth/tenth semester, the bachelor's Degree will be awarded
to those who have fulfilled all the conditions and requirements for the award of
degree as mentioned in 14.10.

2.

At the end of the Program, the Academic Dean of the school will put the final result
of successful students before the Academic Council and after it is passed by AC, the
result will be approved by Board of Governors. Degree & Transcripts will be
awarded to those students, who have fulfilled all the conditions and requirements
for the award of degree.

3.

Successful students will be awarded degree on the University's Annual
Convocation Day. All students who qualify for the Degree are expected to attend
the Convocation. Under prior approval from the Registrar, the degree certificate
may be sent to the student by post/ courier if the Registrar is satisfied about the
conditions so warranting.

4.

The award of Degree may be withheld for non-payment of dues and non-settlement
of accounts with the University or any establishment functioning under the
University of for any pending disciplinary proceeding or examination malpractive.

5.

A student may be issued Provisional degree certificate after the successful
completion of the program but before the issue of final degree certificate.

6.

Duplicate Transcript/ Degree: In case of loss of original Degree/Transcript, a
duplicate copy can be obtained on submission of a court affidavit and on payment of
fees as applicable at the time of application. The application is to be addressed to the
CoE with a copy marked to the Registrar, XIM University, Bhubaneswar.

16.

GRADING PATTERN FOR BA/BBA LLB (HONS.) COURSES
Grading: Once the evaluation process of a given course is completed, students shall
be assigned grades based on the marks secured in the examinations and internal
evaluation. This shall be done based on the eight-point scale specified below:

PERCENTAGE
SECURED

75% and above

70% to 74.5%

65% to 69.5%

GRAD
E

O

A+

A

GRADE
VALUE

GRADE DESCRIPTION

Outstanding–Exceptionalknowledge of the subject matter,
thorough understanding of issues; ability to synthesize
ideas, rules and principles and extraordinary critical and
an analytical ability.

Excellent-Sound knowledge of the subject matter,
thorough understanding of issues; ability to synthesize
ideas, rules and principles and critical and analytical
ability.

Very Good-Sound knowledge of the subject matter,
excellent organizational capacity, ability to synthesize
ideas, rules and principles, critically analyse existing
. and originality in thinking and presentation.
materials

60% to 64.5%

A-

Good-Good understanding of the subject matter, ability
to identify issues and provide balanced solutions to
problems and good critical and analytical skills.

55% to 59.5%

B+

Fair–Average understandingof the subject matter, limited
ability to identify issues
and provide solutions to
problems and reasonable critical and analytical skills.

50% to 54.5%

B

Acceptable-Adequate knowledge of the subject matter to
go to the next level of study and reasonable critical and
analyticalskills.

Below 50%

F

Fail-Poor comprehension of the subject matter, poor
critical and analytical skills and marginal use of the
relevant materials. Will require repeating the course.

16.1.

In order to pass the course, a student must secure at least a 'B' grade (50%).

16.2.

If a student fails to secure a 'B' grade even after the Repeat Examinations, she or he
shall be required to re-register for the course in the same semester of the following
year, along with regular students of the batch immediately following.

16.3.

Re-registered students are required to fulfil all the requirements of the course (e.g.,
assignments/project, presentation, and Examinations) except for class attendance.

16.4.

The Dean, XLS may give not more than two marks in a course as grace marks to a
student who is short of 50% marks in that course. Provided a student shall not be
given more than total of five marks as grace marks in a semester.

16.5.

If a student has got 47.5% or 47.5% or 48.5% marks in a course, it would be rounded
up for the purpose of grace marks only. If a student has got 49.5% marks it would be
rounded up to 50%.

17.

AWARD OF HONOURS

17.1.

The Honours degree for School of Commerce, School of Communications, School
of Sustainability, School of Economics, and School of Governance and Public
Affairs students will be awarded based on the Discipline Specific Elective Courses
(DSE)and Core Courses (CC) of the Programme. A student securing more than 5.5
in the Honours paper shall be awarded Honours degree.

17.2.

Honours degree for School of Computer Science and Engineering students will be
awarded who successfully complete the prescribed academic requirements.

17.3.

Honours' shall be awarded to all students pursuing BA-LLB/ BBA-LLB as per
provisions of Bar Council of India.

17.4.

Ranking will be done based on the final CGPA in a particular discipline /
programme.

17.5.

Distinction will be awarded if a student secures a minimum overall CQPI of 7 and
above.

18.

MEDALS

18.1.

Vice Chancellor's medal for academic excellence is presented at the time of the
Convocation; subject to the condition that the award-winning student has qualified
for the Degree and has not violated the academic/residence/campus discipline of the
programme at any time during his/her tenure at the University. Vice-Chancellor
reserves the right to award medals.

18.2.

Selection criteria for university medals:

18.3.

Student should not have failed in any course during his/her entire academic
programme.

18.4.

Student should not have any history of indiscipline during the programme and also
not subjected to the disciplinary action by the Dean /University Disciplinary
Committee.

DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES
6.1

DISCIPLINE

6.1.1

Conduct: The University attaches utmost importance to personal integrity,
honesty and discipline. A sense of responsibility and a high degree of maturity is
expected of all students inside and outside the campus, as befits future
managers and as students of XIM University. The University strives to achieve
this standard in every aspect of campus life. Each student of the University shall
consciously strive to excel in her/his personal as well as academic conduct. A
proven case of violation of the aforesaid behavioural norms can expose the
student to deprivation of the Degree, a place in the merit list, award of medal,
disqualification from participating in Convocation and other such penalties as
deemed fit by the appropriate authority of the University.

6.1.2

Misconduct: The following are considered serious breaches of discipline and
will attract the penalty of immediate expulsion from the University:

6.1.2.1

Ragging: Any disorderly conduct whether by verbal or written words or by an
act which has the effect of teasing, treating or handling with rudeness any other
student(s), indulging in rowdy or undisciplined activities which causes or is
likely to cause annoyance, hardship or physical harm or to raise fear or
apprehension thereof in fresher(s) or junior student(s) or any other student(s),
asking the student(s) to do any act or perform something which such student(s)
will not in the ordinary course and which has the effect of causing or generating
a sense of shame or embarrassment so as to adversely affect the physique or
psyche of such student(s). Ragging is a cognizable offence and will be reported
to the Police. Thereafter, the law will take its own course of action.

6.1.2.2

Indulging in or aiding/abetting acts of violence, hostage of person or property,
gherao, blockage or blockade of person or property or creating any kind of
obstruction hampering free flow of person or materials, riotous or disorderly
behavior of any kind, moral turpitude, directed at a fellow- student or a faculty
or any other employee of the University/ residence mess, etc.

6.1.2.3

Fraud, dishonesty, misappropriation of university funds or funds of Students'
Organisation, misuse of Rail/Air concessions, and complicity in other financial
irregularities in connection with studentship of the University.

6.1.2.4

Involvement in serious academic malpractice, including plagiarism as per Para6 of the Manual of Policies for Students.

6.1.2.5

Reporting of fictitious data in an empirical study, as and when detected and
established.

6.1.2.6

Indulging in the violation of community and organisational norms, practices
and values during Summer Internship or any other external academic or nonacademic activity leading to physical and psychological harm to individuals

and groups in the community and organisation.
6.1.2.7

Misuse of the Information Technology (I.T.) infrastructure of the XIM
University through software, hardware, internet, intranet, applications,
systems or processes.

6.1.2.7.1

Indulging in anonymous slander, deception, harassment, and the like using
information technology or any other electronic or non-electronic
communication device;

6.1.2.7.2

Violation of any software copyrights.

6.1.2.7.3

Unsolicited communication by group email.

6.1.2.8

Impersonation or proxy submission of assignments, reports and other
documents to the faculty.

6.1.2.9

Leveling false and baseless allegations against any faculty member or officer or
employee of the XIM University;

6.1.2.10

Doing or causing to do any act, which is likely to adversely affect the relations
of the University with its stakeholders' partners and collaborators, including
alumni, current and prospective students, client organizations and institutions;

6.1.2.11

Indulging in any act or acts of individual or group or mob violence inside the
University premises, such as, defacing, discoloring, burning, rampaging,
holding hostage, shouting, rapping or otherwise damaging any banner, fascia,
festoons or property or equipment of a company, erected by any School or by an
Association of the University, commemorating an event organized or
sponsored by any School, or company at the University; or resorting to any acts
of physical violence in any form on person or property of the University
whether within or outside the premises of the University.

6.1.2.12

Indulging in any act subversive of general discipline (the word “discipline”
being used here in its generic sense and in its widest amplitude), inside or
outside the campus, and/or is detrimental to the reputation, image or standing of
the University;

6.1.2.13

Indulging in dissemination of unsolicited and/or malicious correspondences
either electronically or through hard copies within the University and outside
which distorts the image or disturbs the collegiate atmosphere of the
University;

6.1.2.14

Absence without prior permission from the Dean and the Faculty; and/or mass
absence from classes where mass absence would mean more than or equal to
25% of the strength of the class section;

6.1.2.15

Drinking and Drunkenness within or outside the University premises,
including drug and narcotics substance abuse of any means and form;

6.1.2.16

Entering the restricted areas like the Examination Hall, Administrative Offices,
Offices of the Vice Chancellor, Registrar, Finance Director, Controller of

Examinations, Deans of any School, and such other places without the express
permission of the concerned authority;
6.1.2.17

Theft, fraud, dishonesty, bribing or attempt to bribe any person within or outside
the University;

6.1.2.18

Copying in any form in the assignments, projects or in any examination;

6.1.2.19

Permitting, whether willfully or otherwise, a co-student to copy from one's own
answer book or document or material;

6.1.2.20

Smoking in the campus area;

6.1.2.21

Communication of written analyses or answers, in any manner whatsoever, to
other student(s) in respect of home assignments or projects of individual nature;

6.1.2.22

Whispering or communicating with one another by means of signs, symbols or
gestures or in any other body language in the examination hall;

6.1.2.23

Any other act of indiscipline, which is herein unspecified and deemed at the
time of offence as an inappropriate behaviour and conduct by the Disciplinary
Committee of XIM University and/or the management or the appropriate
authority of the University.

6.1.2.24

Use of foul language and slangs in the campus is a serious misconduct. The
offenders will be dealt as per the MoP.

6.1.2.25

Not with standing any of the above-mentioned aspects, the University can
immediately expel the student(s) if it deems any action of the student as an act of
indiscipline. The decision of the University would be final and binding and by
accepting admission in this University, the student on his/her part also accepts
this clause in full.

6.1.2.26

Inappropriate Public Display of Affection (PDA) within the campus is strictly
prohibited. Abuse of Gender-Specific Spaces like washroom is strictly
prohibited.

6.1.2.27

Sexual Harassment:

6.1.2.27.1

Any act of physical abuse including all variants of it: sexual abuse, homosexual
assaults, stripping, forcing obscene and lewd acts, gestures, causing bodily
harm or any other danger to health or person.

6.1.2.27.2

Any act of physical or mental abuse (including bullying and exclusion) targeted
at another student (fresher or otherwise) on the ground of colour, race, religion,
caste, ethnicity, gender (including transgender), sexual orientation, appearance,
nationality, regional origins, linguistic identity, place of birth, place of
residence or economic background.

6.1.2.27.3

The University is committed to ensure the rights and dignity of
LGBT/Alternative sexuality in its Campus. Therefore, any act, comments,
gestures either digitally or physically intending to violate the right/dignity of

LGBT/Alternate Sexuality in its Campus would be dealt with appropriately
which may lead to suspension imposition of fine, reduction in academic grade
and cancellation of studentship.
6.1.2.27.4

Notwithstanding any of the above-mentioned aspects, the University can
immediately expel the student(s) if it deems any action of the student as an act
of indiscipline or take any form of immediate punitive action against such
perpetrators. The decision of the University would be final and binding on such
students and by accepting admission in this University, the student on her/his
part also accepts this para- in full without any prejudice.

6.1.4

CLASSROOM CONDUCT
All students are required to maintain high standards of classroom interaction
quality and conduct. Any behavior considered to be indecent or intolerable by
the concerned faculty or staff will lead to strict disciplinary action by School
against the student. The classroom is a "No Mobile Phone Area". Therefore,
using cell phones is not permitted unless the faculty concerned has given
permission to use it for classroom or academic purposes. Should a student carry
a cell phone in person, s/he shall keep it switched off failing which the
concerned course faculty may expel the defaulting student from that session
and may further debar such students from attending the concerned course.

6.1.5

Giving highest regard to safety, law and order and considering the well-being of
all members of XIM University and its pupils, XIM University compliances
with the UGC mandate and the sovereign laws of the land. XIM University
endeavors to adhere, implement and enforce the Mandates of the UGC
regulations pertaining to the below mentioned subject/item in the Manual of
Policies- the governing document for students conduct within and outside the
University Campus.

Sl.
No.

Subject matter/ Item

Governing Regulation

1)

Sexual Harassment
(prevention,
prohibition and
redressal)

https://www.ugc.ac.in/pdfnews/7203627_UGC_regulations
-harassment.pdf
The Sexual Harassment of women at workplace (Prevention,
Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013
University Grants Commission (UGC) has issued a circular
to all Vice Chancellors on 02.04.2013 regarding strict
adherence to the provisions of the Cigarettes and Other
Tobacco Products (Prohibition of
Advertisement and
Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production,Supply and
Distribution) Act, 2003 and its Rules i.e., Cigarettes and other
Tobacco Products (Packaging and Labelling) Rules,2008.

2)

Alcohol deterrence
and prevention of
drug abuse

3)

Anti-Ragging

4)

5)

6.2

Circular issued on 27.8.2013 by UGC for implementation of
the actionable points of the National Policy on Narcotic
Drugs & Psychotropic Substances (NDPS). NDPS deals
with steps to tackle theproblem of sale of drug to school and
college children.
https://mhrd.gov.in/steps-prevent-drug-abuse-colleges
Report on Alcohol use in Dr. Rajendra Prasad Government
Medical College (RPGMC) Kangra, Himachal Pradesh
(Committee Constituted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court).
https://www.ugc.ac.in/oldpdf/ragging/gazzetaug2010.pdf
https://www.ugc.ac.in/pdfnews/7823260_Anti-Ragging3rd- Amendment.pdf2016

Deterrence towards
https://www.nitt.edu/home/students/UGC_Regulations.pdf
causing bodily harm
Indian Penal Code1860–Offences Affecting Life
or mental harm
Information of Technology Act

Deterrence of
https://www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/files/itbill2000.pdf
Cyber
law
violation
http://cyberpolicebangalore.nic.in/pdf/Cyber%20law%20IPC.pdf

DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES

6.2.1 For minor acts of indiscipline, relating to Courses, such as conduct of classes,
assignments, quizzes and class examinations the Faculty/Evaluator shall be the sole
disciplinary authority acting on her/his own judgment. A Faculty can award penalties
mentioned in 6.2.5(a) and 6.2.5(b) listed below.
6.2.2 For major acts of indiscipline, the Registrar shall be the disciplinary authority, acting
on her/his own judgment and/or in consultation with the Student Disciplinary
Committee/ Academic Committee/Academic Council at her/his discretion. The
Registrar can award one or more penalties listed in 6.2.5 below.
6.2.3 All major allegations brought to the notice of the Registrar can be referred to the
Student Disciplinary Committee and the Registrar shall act based on the report of the
Committee. However, in cases of exigencies with time constraints and/or in cases of
extreme gravity, the Registrar may award a penalty deemed appropriate in
consultation with the faculty concerned and/or the Faculty Council of the School. In
matters of extreme gravity and/or if the matter pertains to other Schools of University
in addition to the school concerned, the Registrar of the University, may refer the
matter to a Special Committee set up for the purpose. The Registrar, upon
recommendation of the Special Committee or the Student Disciplinary Committee, as
the case may be, if necessary, award additional and separate punitive action as deemed
fit.

6.2.4 Before imposition of any penalty, the explanation of the student concerned and her/his
record of past misconduct, similar or otherwise shall be taken into consideration.
Repeat of any misconduct and number of incidents of misconduct shall add to the
gravity of the offence and invite higher penalty or may result in expulsion from the
University.
6.2.5 University Disciplinary Committee
The University has its own disciplinary committees (Academic Discipline, Residence
Discipline & Examination Discipline) that is authorized by the Vice-Chancellor to
conduct disciplinary proceedings, to settle disciplinary charges, to impose
disciplinary sanctions, or to hear appeals thereof in cases involving any violation of
the rules and regulations of the University
6.2.6

Penalty: One or more of the penalties listed below can be awarded to a student for
breach of discipline amounting to misconduct:

6.2.6.1

Written Warning;

6.2.6.2

Violation of any MoP will result in cessation of Scholarship.

6.2.6.3

Violation of any MoP will result in not being a member and PoR or PoC of any
student committee.

6.2.6.4

Violation of any MoP will result in not being awarded Good Conduct Certificate.

6.2.6.5

For Violation of NDPS – Immediate removal from Residence & Information to
Parents

6.2.6.6

Reduction of marks/quality points/grade in a particular component of a Course;

6.2.6.7

Reduction of marks/quality points/grade for the whole Course;

6.2.6.8

A fine as decided by the Disciplinary Committee.

6.2.6.9

Repeating a course of the first/second year as the case may be, along with the next
batch;

6.2.6.10 In cases where a student is awarded an “I” grade in a course as a penalty for
malpractice during examinations, the student may remove the “I” grade by taking
the course the next time it is offered during the next year, concurrently with the
other courses that she/he has to take during that particular term.
6.2.6.11 Suspension of studentship for a year;
6.2.6.12 Suspension from attending and participating in Convocation of the University
6.2.6.13 Debarred from availing Career Advisory Services of the University;
6.2.6.14 Cancellation or withdrawal of any Academic honors – Certificate of Merit,
Diploma, Medallion, Scholarship, etc.

6.2.6.15 Expulsion from the University with immediate effect.
Notwithstanding any of the above-mentioned aspects, the University can
immediately expel or take any other appropriate punitive and/or corrective action
against the student if it deems any action of the student as an act of indiscipline. The
decision of the University would be final and binding and by accepting admission
in this University, the student on her/his part and his/her representative also accepts
this para- in full without any prejudice.
6.3

ALCOHOL ABUSE AND NARCOTICS DETERRENCE POLICY
The University has zero tolerance for possession, solicitation, distribution, sale or use
of alcohol and other psychotropic and/or narcotic substances of any form, kind and
manner on campus by the students. The students engaging in any of these shall be
expelled from the University, which includes all the schools and other units under the
University.
This policy applies to all students in any time and any place on or outside the campus.
By this policy, the student may receive dismissal notice for the following offences:

6.3.1 Alcohol or other psychotropic and/or narcotic substances of any form, kind and
manner use or possession on campus, or in person, within or outside University
premises.
6.3.2 Alcohol or other psychotropic and/or narcotic of any form, kind and manner substance
use off campus which discredits the School and the University,
In such cases the student will not be awarded a Degree or Diploma Certificate, without
paying a penalty of INR 1,00,000/-.
On dismissal from the school, the student may apply for readmission by paying
penalty of INR 1,00,000/- and providing sufficient and necessary information on the
steps that the student has taken to undergo de-addiction treatment for alcohol or other
psychotropic and/or narcotic of any form, kind and manner substance abuse. Student's
readmission request must accompany Doctor's certification as proof of sufficient
treatment for reducing alcohol dependency and other above- mentioned abuse.
The readmission request of the student shall be made formally by an application along
with INR 1,00,000/- and upon receipt of this application, the students readmission
request shall be decided by the following committee:
1.

Registrar

2.

Dean, Academics of the School

3.

Coordinator/ Chair, Student Disciplinary Committee

4.

Student Counsellor or Coordinator, Counselling Committee

5.

Coordinator/ Chair, Prevention of Sexual Harassment Committee

(c)

The University will appreciate any voluntary reporting about any student who has past
history of alcohol or drug abuse. This will be treated confidentially for the purpose of
proposing gde-addiction treatment of the student.

6.4

GRIEVANCES – APPEALS AND REDRESSALS

6.4.1 Grievance Appeal: In matters of sufficient gravity, a student may appeal within one
week of award of the punishment, to the Vice Chancellor for review. The Vice
Chancellor's decision shall be final and binding on the student and his representatives.
6.4.2 GRIEVANCE RESOLUTION
6.4.2.1All grievances should be addressed by the student in a peaceful and civilized manner.
6.4.2.2Any student, having a grievance, may submit a written application to the Registrar
setting out all the circumstances and/or details therein clearly. The grievance
application should be signed by the student concerned.
6.4.2.3Anonymous applications/petitions/letters will not be entertained or attended to under
any circumstances.
6.4.2.4If a student, having obtained grade “D” or grade “F” in any course, feels that he has
been unfairly discriminated against in evaluation/grading or has become a victim of
subjectivity or internal inequity, he can make a representation to the Dean within
seven days after receiving the grade. No grievance shall be considered, if the student
has obtained any grade above “C”.
6.4.2.5The representation should set out all the circumstances and grounds and should be
accompanied by all the relevant documents in support of the allegation. If the Dean is
satisfied that the representation is not frivolous or vexatious, and that there is a prima
facie case, s/he may constitute a committee in consultation with the area concerned
and get the papers/issue re- examined.
6.4.2.6In all such cases, however, the onus of proving such discrimination, subjectivity or
internal inequity, as the case may be, lies entirely on the student concerned. If, at any
time during investigation, it is found that the allegations are mala fide or fictitious or
without substance, the student concerned will expose herself/himself to the risk of
extreme punishment of expulsion from the University as provided herein.
6.4.2.7Misconduct related to residential rules will be dealt by the Hostel Prefect and the
Registrar, as per the Hostel Administration Rules of XIM University

21.

PROHIBITION OF BODY-SHAMING

26.1. The university strictly prohibits body-shaming of any individual including Students /
Staff/ Faculty. If anybody found in violating the same, would be subjected to
appropriate disciplinary action, including suspension, fine, reduction in academic
grade and cancellation of studentship. Body shaming ordinarily means the action or
practice of humiliating someone by making or mocking or critical comments about
their body shape or size, either physically or digitally or by gestures or movements.
22.

PROTECTION OF RIGHTS /DIGNITY OF MEMBERS OF LGBTQIA +
COMMUNITY

27.1. The university is committed to ensure the rights and dignity of LGBTQIA+ in its
Campus. Therefore, any act, comments, gestures either digitally or physically
intending to violate the right/dignity of LGBTQIA+ in its Campus would be dealt with
appropriately which may lead to suspension imposition of fine, reduction in academic
grade and cancellation of studentship.
28.

PROHIBITION OF CYBER-BULLYING AND CYBER HARASSMENT

28.1. Cyber-bullying or cyber harassment by any student targeted towards the fellow
students, staff, faculty, etc. constitutes a conduct that disrupts the educational
environment of the University.
28.2. The students are prohibited from indulging in the acts of cyber-bullying or cyber
harassment using any electronic technology, which includes, but is not limited to,
devices and equipment such as cell phones, computers, and tablets as well as
communication tools, including, but not limited to, text messages, chat platforms,
websites and social media sites like Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, YouTube etc. and
blogs. Students who use University networks or technology to conduct such activity
may be disciplined in accordance with the extant laws in force or notified in future or
may lead to levy of fines, loss of academic grade-points, suspension, loss of
studentship or any other retributive action, as deemed fit by the university.
28.3. The following are examples of instances where social media can cause harm to the
University or a member of the university community or may violate policies:
•

A student establishes a Twitter account that encourages others to submit negative
anonymous messages to an account that will be redistributed by the account holder.

•

A student establishes a fake account under the name of a university official or School
and uses the name and trademark to post vicious comments or other contents.

•

A student uses his or her blog or social media account to berate or otherwise discuss
engagement with or judgment of a fellow student's/faculty/staff's work or other
information considered confidential or personal.

29.

PRINT AND VISUAL MEDIA, AND SOCIAL MEDIA POLICIES

29.1. Students are expected not to interact, on behalf of the university, with media
representatives or invite media persons to the campus without the permission of the
Institute authorities.
29.2. Students are not permitted to record either audio or video lectures in classrooms,
actions of other students, faculty, or staff without prior permission.
29.3. Students are not permitted to provide audio and video clippings of any activity on
campus to the media without prior permission.
29.4. Students are expected to use social media carefully and responsibly. They cannot post
derogatory comments about other individuals from the Institute on social media or
indulge in any such related activities that could have negative ramifications on the
reputation of the university.
30.

DRESSING FORMALITY

30.1 Students are expected to be soberly dressed [business casual, smart casual, business
formals] unless the day's tasks require otherwise. Casual wear is forbidden in
academic spaces and during academic hours. Students must always present a clean,
professional appearance. Everyone is expected to be well-groomed and wear clean
clothing, free of holes, tears, or other signs of wear.
30.2 During 8 AM to 7 PM, the dress code for ALL UG students would be:
30.3 Boys: White or light blue full/half sleeve Shirt, Black Trouser, formal shoes
30.4 Girls: White or light blue full/half sleeve Shirt, Black Trouser, formal shoes
The Students are free to buy from outside.
If anyone is found in another dress, the faculty will mark them absent inside class. The
school will impose a fine of Rs. 2000 for the day of violation.
31.

GRIEVANCE RESOLUTION

31.1. Any student, having a grievance, may submit a written application to the Dean setting
out all the circumstances and/or details therein clearly. The student concerned should
sign the grievance application.
31.2. Anonymous applications/petitions/letters will not be entertained or attended to under
any circumstances.
31.3. If a student, having obtained grade “D” or grade “F” in any course, feels that he or she
has been unfairly discriminated against in evaluation/grading or has become a victim
of subjectivity or internal inequity, s/he can make a representation to the Dean within

seven days after receiving the grade. No grievance shall be considered if the student
has obtained any grade above “C”.
31.4. The representation should set out all the circumstances and grounds and should be
accompanied by all the relevant documents in support of the allegation. If the Dean is
not satisfied with the representation, and that there is a prima facie case, the Dean may
constitute a Committee in consultation with the faculty concerned and get the
papers/issue re-examined.
31.5. In all such cases, however, the onus of proving such discrimination, subjectivity or
internal inequity, as the case may be, lies entirely on the student concerned. If, at any
time during investigation, it is found that the allegations are mala fide or wild or
without substance, the student concerned will expose himself/herself to the risk of
extreme punishment of expulsion from the University as provided herein.
31.6. The students' residence (hostel) Prefect will deal with misconduct related to
residential rules with the help of the Dean, Registrar, and the Vice Chancellor, as per
the students' residence (hostel) MoP of XIM University.
32.

STUDENT PERFORMANCE FEEDBACK

32.1. Faculty/instructors will give academic feedback to students periodically on their
performance in person / through mail or through the University UMS.
32.2. Faculty/instructors may from time to time caution the students if their
grades/performance is not up to the performance.
33.

COURSE FEEDBACK BY THE STUDENTS

33.1. The objective of the course feedback is to facilitate improvement in the courses.
33.2. Students' feedback is taken for the faculty and the course before the completion of
every course through UMS.
33.3. Students are required to give “well-considered independent feedback" on the courses
taught in that particular semester once they receive notification from the Dean's
Office.
33.4. If a student fails to give feedback through the UMS, his/her grades will not be able to
view their grades.
33.5. Under such circumstance where the student fails to give feedback through the UMS,
the Dean will impose a penalty of Rs. 5000/- for each course to the student.
34.

STUDENT TRAVEL CONCESSIONS

34.1. Railway Concession: Student's railway concession certificates are issued by the
Dean's Office to full time students (who in age are not older than 24 years and are not

wage-earners or housewives) only for going home or for summer placement training
during vacations. Concession orders will be issued only during the vacation. The
outward journey on the student's concession order is not to be undertaken before the
vacation commences.
34.2. Air travel Concession: Concession forms may be obtained from the Indian Airlines
Office and submitted to the Dean's Office for certification, after affixing a passport
size photograph of the applicant. Eligibility rules for air concessions are the same as
for Railway Concessions.
34.3. The term 'home' denotes – “The place where the parent (or if no parent is alive, the
student's guardian) normally resides. When the parent is alive, the question of using
the concession for visiting the 'guardian' does not arise.”
35.

GRIEVANC E- APPEALS AND REDRESSALS
In matters of sufficient gravity, a student may appeal within one week of award of the
punishment, to the Vice Chancellor for review. The Vice Chancellor decision shall be
final and binding on the student and his representatives.

SECTION- B
1.

VALUE ADDED-PROGRAMMES

1.1

The University offers the coaching facilities for the following Value-Added
Programmes inside the campus premises, to help the students, choose the right career
path after their graduation.

•

MBA Admission Test

•

Civil Services Examination

•

CA Foundation

1.2

The university has tied up with reputed institutes for imparting the coaching for MBA
Admission Test and Civil Services Examination with Career Launcher (CL) and ALS
Academy, respectively. The university has also obtained the accreditation from the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) for providing coaching facilities for
CA Foundation course. The inhouse faculty from School of Commerce facilitate this
coaching.

2.

RURAL SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT PROGRAMME:
As part of rich legacy to serve the society, the XIM University has unique social
engagement initiative for the UG students. This outreach undertaking mandate
student engagement with community and villagers outside the University campus.
Student body are given all support to plan, design and engage with community in
activities like civic support events, cultural exchange, learning life lessons from
community leaders etc. The University mandate that all student in their programme
tenure must engage for minimum thirty hours (30) hours with community as a part of
'social engagement'. This is a mandatory requirement for acquiring the undergraduate
degree. Students will be awarded 3 credits for the social engagement programme.

3.

NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)
NSS is a scheme and initiative of the Ministry of Sports and Youth Affairs,
Government of India where students can develop their personality and enhance their
leadership skills & qualities through delivering community service at village level.
NSS volunteers place the 'community' before 'self'. Student should feel a sense of civic
responsibility in providing voluntary social service to the community in adopted
villages through the developmental awareness programme, regular social activities,
and a special developmental camp.
As NSS volunteers, students can apply for state and national level awards. You may
visit NSS website (www.nss.gov.in) to know more about NSS programs, the regular &
camp activities, awards & benefits available for student's volunteers.

Objectives of NSS:
The objective of creating NSS units is to empower UG students and create future
leaders in them. The primary aim of the NSS programme is to develop the personality
and character of the student youth through voluntary and community service.
Students would gain skills in mobilizing community participation and acquire
leadership qualities and democratic values. NSS aims at developing the following
attributes/ competencies among the volunteers:
•

To understand the community in which the NSS volunteers work and to understand
themselves in relation to their community.

•

To identify the needs and problems of the community and involve themselves in
problem- solving exercises.

•

To develop among themselves a sense of social and civic responsibility.

•

To utilize their knowledge in finding practical solutions to individual and community
problems.

•

To gain skills in mobilizing community participation.

•

To acquire leadership qualities and democratic values.

•

To develop the capacity to meet emergencies and natural disasters.

4.

MAGIS EXCHANGE-PROGRAMME
A Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) has been signed between International
Association for Jesuits Universities (IAJU) and XIM University. This agreement
seeks to build a cohort of student leaders who can participate in a semester-long
academic international exchange programme for internship/service learning in a
cross-cultural setting. Through this agreement, students selected from XIM university
will pursue a Magis exchange programme in one of the Jesuit Universities across the
globe. In addition, students will also study an online course on 'Global Citizenship'
offered by the Loyola University Chicago in a global classroom.

5.

INTERNSHIPS

5.1

Applicable to School of Governance and Public Affairs, School of Commerce, School
of Economics and School of Computer Science & Engineering.

5.1.1 At the end of the second year during the summer, a student is required to undergo
“Summer Internship” in an organization for 6 to 8 weeks. However, for B.Tech.
Computer Science & Engineering students undergo Internship at the end of third year.
The objective of the summer internship is to expose the student to the practical aspect
of academics. This exposure to the real world of business and industry allows him/her
an opportunity to relate the classroom learning to live situations. It gives students an

opportunity to observe an organization in operation and to sharpen their knowledge
and skills by putting them to use. Summer internship also gives students practical
experience that will help them plan their careers.
5.1.2 The student would have an executive guide in the organization taking him/her for
summer internship. On completion of the project a student is required to submit his/her
Project Report to the executive guide for evaluation and to the Dean. Ordinarily, the
report may not exceed 30 typed pages (sides). The contents should include definition
of the problem, methodology used, data analysis, findings, conclusions, and
recommendations.
5.1.3 Each student is required to make a presentation on the summer project undertaken by
him or her before a panel of faculty who will evaluate and award marks / grades.
5.1.4 No students will be entitled to receive the Degree without completing the summer
internship satisfactorily. A student, who does not complete the summer internship
satisfactorily, and who does not comply with the requirements, will have to do another
summer internship before becoming eligible to receive the Degree.
5.1.5 Students, who receive adverse comments from their executive guides and do any act
which brings disrepute to the university will be liable for disciplinary action, which
may result in expulsion from the university.
5.2

Applicable for School of Communications

5.2.1 At the end of the first year, during the summer, a student is required to undergo
“Summer Internship Programme-I” in an organization for 4 to 6 weeks.
5.2.2 At the end of the Second year, during the summer, a student is required to undergo
“Summer Internship Programme-II” in an organization for 6 to 8 weeks.
5.2.3 In the sixth semester a student is required to undergo “Final Internship” in an
organization for 12 weeks.
5.2.4 The Career Advisory Services Committee of the school facilitates summer internship
programme - I, II and final internship. It is purely a student driven activity, assisted by
the faculty mentors.
5.2.5 The Career Advisory Services Committee office assists the students in planning their
internships and industry experience.
5.2.6 Although the University shall make every attempt to facilitate the process of getting
each student an internship, which may match one's interest, it cannot be taken as a
matter of right.
5.2.7 As a matter of policy, the academic work of the students will take precedence over
other activities.

5.2.8 Each student can apply to three organizations at a time, either through the School or on
their own. In case of utilizing, one's own contacts, the student is advised to inform the
Coordinator of Career Advisory Services Committee
5.2.9 It is the sole responsibility of the student to inform the Coordinator of Career Advisory
Services Committee in case of any delay/ postponement/ adjournment/ suspension
before or during the process of internship.
5.2.10The first offer made by a company (In reference to point 6.2.7) to a student
participating in the internship process will be the final offer. This implies that once a
student gets an offer, s/he is considered signed out of the internship process.
5.2.11A student's application for internship with an organization amounts to expression of
his/her interest in that organization. No student will be allowed to withdraw from the
internship process once his/her resume has been forwarded to the organization. An
exception will be made only if the student has already signed out of the process, either
voluntarily, or as a penalty, or by virtue of an earlier internship offer.
5.2.12A student who fails to complete his/her summer internship I, II in the organization that
has made an offer to him/her through the School, shall be signed out from participating
in the internship procedure the next academic year.
5.2.13In case any student is found deliberately underperforming during the internship
process, or if there is any complaint or negative feedback from the executives of any
organization regarding the conduct of a student, strict action will be taken as deemed
fit by the Coordinator of Career Advisory Services Committee, in consultation with
the Dean. This may lead to debarment from applying to companies, or even exclusion
from the entire internship process altogether.
5.2.14Cases of misconduct/unprofessional behavior by a student reported by the company
during or after the internship period will be dealt with utmost strictness. The minimum
penalty would be debarment from participating in the Career Advisory Services
Committee process.
5.3

Applicable for Xavier Law School

5.3.1 As per Rule 25 of Schedule III of Part IV of BCI Rules of Legal Education, the legal
education regulator in India, the Bar Council of India prescribes that the minimum
period of internship for registered law students is 20 weeks for the integrated 5 years
programme. Hence the students must mandatorily do 4 to 8 weeks of internship per
calendar year to graduate as a LLB student.
5.3.2 The pattern of internships semester wise shall be as follows.The students are expected
to do their internships in the organizations/institutions stated against the respective
year of study.
5.3.3 First year: Civil Society Organizations, Public Policy Think tanks, Research Centers

at Law institutes, and Legal Services authorities etc.
5.3.4 Second Year: Advocates / Law firms into Trial Court practice and district courts,
Electronic Legal Repositories, LPOs etc.,
5.3.5 Third Year: Tribunals, regulatory bodies, Law firms, Legislatives Committees,
Advocates practicing at the Appellate Level, High court Clerkship, Legal wing of
Political Party, Legal reporting at Media Houses, Electronic Legal Resource Analysis,
Student Research Assistantship, Registry of a Court or a Tribunal, practical law
application projects undertaken in association with the School of Law, law reforms
commission etc.,
5.3.6 Fourth Year: Law Firms, Corporates, PSU's and Regulatory Bodies, SC clerkship, any
other places of law in action or litigation and management, etc.,
Fifth Year: depending on the area of interest and the career progression the student can
intern in an organization of their choice like Law Firms, Corporates, Regulatory
Bodies, Judicial Offices, Supreme Court and High Court Judges, Advocates, etc.,
6.

USE OF AUDIO-VISUAL STUDIOS, DIGITAL PHOTOGRAPHIC STUDIOS,
AUDIO STUDIOS, MULTIMEDIA LABORATORY AND EDITING LAB
(For the School of Communications Students)

6.1. Procedure for Using Audio- Video Studios:
All the students are expected to follow the policy/rules of the studios/lab prescribed by
the Dean. Students can use the studios and lab facilities for learning and enhancement
of knowledge and skills. Any student who wants to use the audio or video studio
outside the teaching hours or for any practical work, must sign the Equipment Use
Contract/Facility Request Form, which is available at the equipment office. This must
be duly approved by the Dean, School of Communications. Students are allowed to
take/use equipment's inside or out of studio only after obtaining the written permission
through contract form.
6.2. Use of Computer Lab:
Besides the class hours, any student using computer lab has to make an entry in the 'lab
record' his/her entry and exit time. No student is permitted to take away any software,
hardware, or any part of any equipment outside of the lab or to manipulate the settings
of the systems or software. No one will be allowed to copy any of the materials/media
content for either news feature or short fiction film for any other purpose from either
the computers or hard discs.
6.1.1

When in Multimedia Lab – Do's

6.1.1.1Write down proper information in the log register and sit in the allocated computer
systems only. Login (Open the computer system) with proper credentials (user –
STUDIO).

6.1.1.2 Maintain silence inside the lab. Mobile phones should be in Silent/Switch off mode.
Keep your Bags/Books outside the lab.
6.1.1.3 Maintain discipline and do your allocated task only. Properly turn off the computer
system and any Bluetooth device (Keyboard & Mouse) when you leave the lab.
6.1.1.4 Use your personal Pen Drive/Hard Drive for any project.
6.1.2

When in Multimedia Lab – Don'ts

6.1.2.1 No food or beverages allowed in the lab. No personal Laptops/Tablets/Mobile
phones/Bags are allowed inside the lab.
6.1.2.2 Do not change any settings/Files of the computer system. Do not create any folder
or files on any systems.
6.1.2.3 Do not browse any Malicious/Forbidden sites in the lab. Do not install or download
any software or modify or delete any system files on any lab computers.
6.1.2.4 Access to social networking sites in the lab is strictly prohibited unless directed by
the faculty teaching a particular course.
Do not place any project file on the desktop of the system.
6.2

Use of studio equipment/ Studios and Multimedia Lab Policy

6.2.1

Any student, who wants to use any equipment for his/her individual or group
practical/assignment outside the studio, is expected to follow the procedure.

6.2.2

Reservation of studio for project works should be made two days in advance.
Requests for studio booking must be routed through faculty teaching that course.
Last minute reservations and requests will be made upon availability and at
faculty/staff discretion.

6.2.3

The following is the usual priority for facility use: academic, co-curricular and
productions. Sometimes this priority will be changed upon discretion of the Dean.

6.2.4

Students are only allowed to checkout equipment that they have received training
on, either within classes, formal workshops, or self-scheduled sessions with the
technical staff.

6.2.5

Equipment can only be checked in and out Monday through Friday, between
9 AM - 5 PM, and on Saturdays 9 AM to 12.30 PM or by appointment. Equipment
can be checked out for only one day at a time. Equipment that has not been
requested by other users can be renewed, but students must bring equipment
physically back to the equipment office during checkout hours to be inspected by
the staff.

6.2.6

No student is permitted to keep any equipment, parts of equipment, software or
hardware under their custody. However, exceptions can be considered only in

consultation with the Dean. The equipment taken out of the studio or lab should be
returned by the prescribed time to the lab technician. If any student is to return the
equipment, s/he will have to pay a fine of Rs. 500/- per hour.
6.2.7

It is the responsibility of all borrowers to inspect equipment upon checkout to
ensure it is in proper condition and contains all accessories – if damaged or missing
parts are not identified upon checkout, it will be assumed to have occurred during
the user's possession.

6.2.8

Borrowers are expected to return equipment in the same condition they received it.
If equipment is returned in damaged or incomplete condition due to student neglect,
or not returned at all, student(s) will be charged appropriate replacement costs for
the equipment, and subsequent borrowing and usage privileges will be suspended
until charges have been billed. The decision of the Dean will be final and binding.

6.2.9

No student is permitted to bring non-school of communications members inside the
audio or video studio or computer lab to undertake any work of the student or part of
the work taken up by the student. However, entry to the studio will be allowed only
if they come as artists/performers as part of the project as and when necessary, in
consultation with the project in-charge, Dean.

6.2.10 Negligent and unprofessional use of equipment violating these policies will have a
direct impact on grades of the courses with a production component.
6.3

Use of Audio-Visual Studio Floor

6.3.1

ABSOLUTELY NO FOOD, DRINKS, SMOKING, GUM CHEWING will be
allowed inside the studio, action area, production control room, green room, edit
suites, audio studio and voice booth. If there is a need for dramatic purposes for
drinking (water), smoking, gum chewing, or pets, seek approval from the Dean.

6.3.2

Items are not to be affixed to the studio walls and/or screens. No writing on the
walls, windows, or screens. For the dramatic purposes, attaching any items,
pictures, posters, banners etc., to the lighting grid, requires prior notice and staff
assistance. Items are to be attached at the beginning of a scheduled period and they
must be removed at the end of that scheduled period.

6.3.3

Heavy items are not to be dragged over the floors.

6.3.4

Handle all the equipment's inside the studio carefully.

6.3.5

Spraying of any kind is not allowed in the studios, i.e.: hair spray, dulling spray,
painting etc. All cue tape marks on the floors are to be carefully removed at the end
of the scheduled period.

6.3.6

If you bring in personal props, costumes, etc. they must be removed at the end of the
scheduled period. Ask for assistance if at all unsure about how to interconnect any
studio equipment.

6.3.7

7.

After individual or class use, studios will be inspected. Any failure to follow the
proper use & care will be treated as violation. If violations are repeated, the
violator(s) will not be allowed to use the facilities in future.
CODE OF CONDUCT FOR THE STUDENTS DURING EXAMINATION

7.1. A student should report at the examination hall at least 15 minutes before the
scheduled time of the exam. A student will not be allowed into examination hall after
the commencement of the examination. If a student is late in arriving at the exam
venue the Chief Invigilator/Invigilator is at the sole discretion to allow or disallow
such late comers. It is the primary responsibility of the student to be available at the
exam venue well ahead in time.
7.2.

Wearing of face mask is mandatory during examinations, if there is any prior
notification from the appropriate authority of the University.

7.3. All students must bring their Identity Card to the Exam venue, and it should be kept on
their desk during the entire examination. Failure to do so may render the student to be
expelled from the exam venue and exam will be cancelled.
7.4. Each student is expected to bring their own writing equipment/aid including ruler,
calculator, etc., into the examination hall, as permitted by the instructor.
Exchanging/borrowing of writing equipment/aid from other examinees is not
permitted at any time during the examination.
7.5. Carrying of mobile phones or any electronics/bluetooth device including smart watch,
health watch etc. into the examination hall is strictly prohibited. Students are also not
allowed to keep mobile phones / any electronics gadget with them even in switched off
or silent mode during examination. If a student has any kind of electronic gadgets/
mobile phone with him/her then she/he must deposit it with the invigilators before the
examination begins. Failure to adhere to this rule will immediately cause the exam to
stand cancelled and the student will be asked to leave the examination hall by the
Invigilators after filling the incident report.
7.6. Any electronic gadget/mobile phones confiscated during the exam shall remain with
the COE Office and returned to the student only after disciplinary process is over. The
University shall not be responsible for any loss of any electronic items confiscated
during the examination. Students are, therefore advised to refrain from carrying,
possessing or wearing any electronic devices to the examination hall.
7.7. A student attending any examination may be frisked before, during or after the
examination if deemed fit by the Invigilators or any other appropriate staff of the
University.
7.8. All tests are “closed book” unless explicitly specified otherwise by the faculty
concerned with prior intimation to the Dean's Office and the Controller of
Examinations Office. No paper, books, or notes, etc. are allowed into the examination

hall, except when the test is declared to be “open-book.”
7.9. Any notes/incriminating documents found in possession or recovered from students
or any exchange of remarks, notes or purposeful gestures, or glances at another
student's paper in the examination hall will be considered as an attempt to cheat and
will be treated as a malpractice. The invigilator will report this to the Controller of
Examinations in the prescribed Incident form where both the student and the
invigilator will be required to sign. This will immediately cause the exam to stand
cancelled and the student will be asked to leave the examination hall by the
Invigilators after filling the incident report.
7.10. Except for essential communication with the invigilator, a student is not permitted to
communicate in any form with anyone during the examination. Passing or receiving
information in any form or peeping into the answer books of others during the
examination constitutes misconduct and is strictly prohibited. A student, who assists
or abets giving or passing of information, in any form whatsoever, will be considered
as committing malpractice and could be expelled from the examination hall by the
Invigilators.
7.11. No student will be allowed to go to washroom during examination in first 45 minutes
and last 30 minutes of the examinations. However, in case of any exigencies only, a
student may be allowed to go to washroom by the invigilator, but this will be after
recording the out-time and in-time by the invigilator.
7.12. Any student spending more than 5 minutes in the washroom may be disallowed by the
invigilator and the examination may stand cancelled and the student asked to leave the
exam venue.
7.13. Only one person at a time will be allowed to go out of the examination hall to the
washrooms. The invigilator will monitor the students and may record the time taken
by the student in the washroom. Invigilators' observation will be considered as full and
final and no negotiation will be entertained.
7.14. Students must fill the particulars such as name, roll no., etc. on the cover page of the
answer booklet as soon as it is distributed, before proceeding to answer any question.
7.15. Students must stop writing as soon as the invigilator signals the end of the time allotted
for the examination failing which the answer sheet may be rejected and cancelled.
7.16. All examinees must keep their Answer Sheets on their writing desk as per the seating
order assigned to them.
7.17. Any violation of the norms of examination will be considered a serious offence and an
act of misconduct and will be reported in the prescribed format by the invigilator to the
Controller of Examinations for necessary action.

7.18. In case of any violation of the code of conduct, appropriate action will be taken as per
the extant provisions of the Student Manual of Policies or as deemed fit by the
appropriate authority of this University.
7.19. All students of this University are sincerely advised to take examination matters and
the above rules very seriously to avoid any situation of malpractice and the consequent
implication.
8.

LIST OF EXAMINATION MALPRACTICES AND PENALTIES
PENALTIES

EXAMINATION MALPRACTICE
Talking to another student in the
examination hall. (Both in offline/
online exam.)

·
·

·

Warning by the invigilators and immediate
change of seat.
On second recurrence, the invigilator may
pass “Reported Against” remark on the
answer script of the student for deduction of
at least 25% of the marks.
Further repeat offence after Reporting
Against on the answer script of the student,
the student will be expelled by the Invigilator
and the Invigilator will submit Incident
Report.’

Possession of chits/ notes/ books/
copies or any unauthorized
materials relating to the exam.

·

Examination of the particular paper will be
cancelled and the student shall be expelled
from the examination hall. He/She will
awarded an F Grade in the Course and may
re-appear to rectify the F Grade in the next
available Term/Semester with the junior
batch.

Possessing mobile phones, smart
watches, health watches or any
other electronic device in or on
person inside the examination hall.

·

Examination of the particular paper will be
cancelled and the student shall be expelled
from the examination hall. He/She will
awarded an F Grade in the Course and may
re-appear to rectify the F Grade in the next
available Term/Semester with the junior
batch.

PENALTIES

EXAMINATION MALPRACTICE
Browsing through mobile phone or
mobile phone in switched on mode
during examination.

·

Examination of the particular paper will be
cancelled and the student shall be expelled
from the examination hall. He/She will
awarded an F Grade in the Course and may
re-appear to rectify the F Grade in the next
available Term/Semester with the junior
batch.

Impersonation on behalf of another
student.

·

Examination of the particular paper will be
cancelled and the student shall be expelled
from the examination hall.
Term/Semester Grades for all courses will be
withheld.
Examination Disciplinary Committee
comprising of the Registrar (Convenor),
Controller of Examination and the concerned
Dean of the School shall meet and decide on
the quantum of the penalty which may
include a maximum sentence of expulsion
from the University.
FIR may be lodged against such students in
the local police station.

·
·

·

Misbehavior in any form towards
invigilator.

·
·

·

Term/Semester Grades for all c o u r s e s
will be withheld.
Examination of the particular paper will be
cancelled, and the student shall be expelled
from the examination hall.
Examination Disciplinary Committee
comprising of the Registrar (Convenor),
Controller of Examination and the
concerned Dean of the School shall meet and
decide on the quantum of the penalty which
may include a maximum sentence of
expulsion from the University.

PENALTIES

EXAMINATION MALPRACTICE
Refusal to give written statement
about the incident when demanded
by examination related
officer/invigilator.

·

·

Misbehavior to any officer/staff
associated with examination.

·

Examination of the particular paper will be
cancelled, and the student shall be expelled
from the examination hall. S/he will have to
clear the paper in the next available
examination or with the junior batch.
Additionally, the COE may deduct up to 50%
of marks of the re-appeared paper.

Examination Disciplinary Committee
comprising of the Registrar (Convenor),
Controller of Examination and the concerned
Dean of the School shall meet and decide on
the quantum of the penalty which may
include a maximum sentence of expulsion
from the University.

9.

PROCEDURE TO DEAL WITH CASES OF MALPRACTICES

9.1

The misconduct/malpractice/ unfair activity of a student shall be reported in a
specified form and submitted to the Controller of examinations by the invigilator
along with the answer script of the alleged student in a separate covered packet
immediately after the examination on the same day.

9.2

The incriminating material (if any) recovered from the candidate as well as the
filled-up form should be signed by the invigilator and by the student or by any coinvigilator if the student refuses to sign.

9.3

The report of the invigilator along with the incriminating material shall be placed
before the COE for scrutiny and award of penalty as mentioned in Section 8 above.

9.4

In case of use or possession of a mobile phone/ any objectionable electronics devices
the same will be seized by the invigilator and will be submitted in the office of the
COE to be later returned to the student upon suitable application by the student.

EXAMINATION DISCIPLINARY ISSUES
An Examination Disciplinary Committee (EDC) comprising of the following
members may be constituted under the chairmanship of the Controller of
Examinations, XIM University to decide/ impose penalty on the erring students for
matters mentioned in Section 8 (e), (f), (h) or any other grievous or exceptional exam

related malpractice matters deemed fit to be covered under the purview of the EDC
as decided by the COE of this University.
The shall comprised of the following members:
1.

Controller of Examination (Convener).

2.

Registrar, XIM University.

3.

Dean of the concerned schools.

4.

Any special invitee/ concerned faculty/staff/student.

Any three will form quorum for the meeting. The decision of the EDC will be
communicated to the registrar before award of penalty to any students. However,
before imposing any penalty, the explanation of the student concerned shall be taken
into account. Repeat of any type of misconduct and number of misconducts shall add
to the gravity of the offence.
In addition to the above penalties for the offence, the COE or the Registrar may also
impose any or all of the following penalties at his/their sole discretion.
a.

Monetary fine up to Rs. 5000/- to be paid to the University

b.

Informing the parents / guardians of the concerned student.

c.
Informing to the higher authority of XIM University for further disciplinary
action.
Appeal: In matters of sufficient gravity, a student may appeal within one week of
punishment, to the Vice Chancellor for review. The decision of the Vice Chancellor
is final and binding to the student and his representatives.
11.

SELF-INSPECTION OF ANSWER SCRIPTS

All students are required to check their evaluated mid-term and end-term exam
answer papers as and when notified by the faculty concerned or the Dean's Office by
the stipulated deadline. Students are not allowed to carry the answer papers outside
the premises nor are permitted to take photographs of the answer papers. For any
totalling errors of marks or omission of evaluation of any segment of the answer(s),
they are required to leave a written note with the secretary showing the answer
papers for reference/verification of the faculty concerned. There is no scope for
alteration of marks at the stage of viewing the answer papers. The main purpose of
allowing the students to see their answer papers is to enable them to obtain a
feedback on his/her performance. However, unless the students check their
evaluated answer papers during the display of sheets, there will not be any
opportunity given to check their answers papers thereafter.

PROGRAMME STRUCTURE & COURSE LISTS
(Note - CBCS: Choice Based Credit System, AECC: Ability Enhancement Compulsory Course,
CC: Core Course, SEC: Skill Enhancement Course, GE: Generic Elective, DSE: Discipline Specific Elective)

B.A. (Hons.) Public Administration and Governance
SL.NO

NAME OF THE COURSE

CREDITS

COURSE CATEGORY

Core

Core
Core
SEC
AECC
GE

Core
Core
Core
SEC
AECC
GE

Core
Core
Core
GE

Semester - I

Introduction to Public Administration: Principles and
Theories
Political Theory: Concepts and Debates
Economics
Communication Skills for Public Policy I
Studies in English Literature
Human Development and Social Inclusion

Semester - II

Indian Constitution, Government and Politics
Introduction to Policy and Governance
Sociology
Communication Skills for Public Policy II
Environmental Studies
Introduction to Public Health

Semester - III

Indian Administration
Civil Society and Governance
Research Methodology
Business Mathematics

Semester - IV

Comparative Public and Development
Administration

Core

International Relations and Global Governance

Core

Digital Governance
Academic Writing I
Religions of the World

DSE
SEC
GE

Semester - V

Personnel Administration in India
Administrative Ethics and Governance

Core
Core

Organisational Behaviour

DSE

Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
Academic Writing II

DSE
SEC

Semester VI

Public Finance and Social Audit

Core

Conflict Management & Leadership

DSE

Dissertation

Dissertation

B.Sc. (Hons.) Environmental Science
SL.NO

NAME OF THE COURSE

CREDITS

COURSE CATEGORY

Semester-I

Introduction to the Environment
English Communication

C1
AECC1

Environment & Society
Natural Resource Management and Sustainable
Development

GE1

C2

Semester-II

Introduction to the Biological Environment

C3

Introduction to the Physical Environment
Human Wildlife Conflict and Management
MIL/Communication

C4
GE2
AECC2

Semester-III

Fundamentals of Ecology
Biodiversity and Conservation
Water Resources
Digital Photography

C5
C6
C7
GE3

Remote Sensing, Geographic Information System
& Modelling

SEC1

Semester-IV

Solid Waste Management

C8

Environmental Chemistry

C9

Basics of Environmental Statistics and Computer
Application

C10

Environment Impact & Risk Assessment
Green Technologies

SEC2
GE4

Semester-V

Environmental Pollution and Human Health
Environmental Instrumentation
Environmental Economics
Energy & Environment

C11
C12
DSE1
DSE2

Semester-VI

Environmental legislation and policy

C13

Atmospheric processes

C14

Land and Soil Conservation and Management

DSE4

Natural Hazards & Disaster Management
Capstone Project

DSE3
C15

B.Sc. (Hons.) Sustainable Development
SL.NO

NAME OF THE COURSE

CREDITS

COURSE CATEGORY

AECC1
GE1
C1

C2

Semester-I

English Communication
Environment & Society
Human Development & Social Inclusion
Natural Resource Management and Sustainable
Development

Semester-II

Introduction to the Biological Environment

C3

Human Wildlife Conflict and Management

GE2

The Journey of Sustainable Development
MIL/Communication

C4
AECC2

Semester-III

Fundamentals of Ecology
Biodiversity and Conservation
Water Resources
Digital Photography

C5
C6
C7
GE3

Remote Sensing, Geographic Information System
& Modelling

SEC1

Semester-IV

Solid Waste Management

C8

Environmental Chemistry

C9

Basics of Environmental Statistics and Computer
Application

C10

Environment Impact & Risk Assessment
Environment and Gender

SEC2
GE4

Semester-V

Environmental legislation and policy

C13

Atmospheric processes

C14

Land and Soil Conservation and Management
Natural Hazards & Disaster Management
Capstone Project

DSE4
DSE3
C15

B.Sc (Hons.) Economics
SL.NO

NAME OF THE COURSE

CREDITS

COURSE CATEGORY

Semester – I

Introductory Microeconomics

CC

Mathematics for Economists I
Studies in English Literature
Indian Polity: The Constitution of India and the
Political Process

CC
AECC

GE

CC
CC
GE
AECC

CC
CC
CC
GE

SEC

Semester – II

Introductory Macroeconomics
Mathematics for Economists II
Classics Shakespearean Plays
Environmental Science

Semester – III

Intermediate Microeconomics I
Intermediate Macroeconomics I
Statistical Methods for Economists
Indian Society & Culture
Application of Statistical Package for Economic
Analysis

Semester – IV

Intermediate Microeconomics II

CC

Intermediate Macroeconomics II
Elements of Econometrics
Research & Reporting Methods + Data Analytics
& Interpretation
Digital Media & Mass Communication

CC
CC

SEC

GE

CC
CC
DSE
DSE

Semester – V

Development Economics I
Indian Economy I
Course (From List)
Course (From List)

Semester – VI

Development Economics II
Indian Economy II
Course (From List)
Course (From List)
Dissertation #

CC
CC
DSE
DSE

Rural Social Engagement Programme

# Selection of students who are eligible to do dissertation will be determined by his/ her overall previous
semesters' grade and an interview by a panel of faculty members
# A student can consider dissertation as one of the alternatives under any DSE course.
# For example, suppose DSEIII has two alternatives: A and B. A student can choose either A or B or
Dissertation.
# Similarly suppose DSEIV has two alternatives: C and D. Another student can choose either C or D or
Dissertation.
# So, it is a student's choice with which DSE course he/ she wants to have dissertation as one of the
alternatives.
# The dissertation will spread over entire year and the gradation will be done in the Sem- VI.

LIST OF ELECTIVES
SL. NO.

ELECTIVE COURSE

SL.
NO.

ELECTIVE COURSE

Political Economy I

Political Economy II.

Intermediate Econometrics

Comparative Economic Development.

Advanced Distributional Analysis

Gender Economics.

Topics in Macroeconomics II.

Issues in Development Economics.
Classical Political Economy and Heterodox
Traditions.

Economic History of India
(1857-1947)
Topics in Macroeconomics I

Money and Financial Markets

Economics of Education and
Health.
Environmental Economics.

Industrial Organization.

Monetary Macroeconomics: Theory and Policy.

Topics in Microeconomics
International Economics

Game Theory and Behavioral Economics
Public Economics

Introductory Time Series Analysis.

Financial Econometrics.

B.Sc. (Hons.) Mass Communication
SL.NO

NAME OF THE COURSE

CREDITS

COURSE CATEGORY

Semester – I

English Communication

AECC

Introduction to Mass Communication Studies
Introduction to Journalism

CC
CC

Audience Psychology, Art & Aesthetics

GE

Digital Audio & Radio Production

SEC

Digital Still Photography

SEC

Computer Application - Graphic Design I

SEC

Semester – II

Environmental Studies

AECC

Introduction to Television Production

CC

Mass Communication Theories
Elements of Film
Writing for Media
Computer Application - Graphic Design II

CC
CC
GE
SEC

Summer Internship Programme - I

DSE

Semester - III

Media Culture & Society

CC

Advertising & Public Relations

CC

News Reporting & Anchoring
Motion Graphic Design
Entertainment Television

GE
SEC
SEC

Digital Video Editing

DSE

Semester – IV

Communication for Developme nt
Media Research
Corporate Etiquette & Group Communication

CC
CC
GE

Digital Marketing & Social Media

SEC

Visual Effects

SEC

Online Journalism
Digital Film Making
Summer Internship Programme – II

DSE
DSE
DSE

Dissertation
Media Law & Ethics
Event Management
Digital Public Relations & Corporate
Communication

CC
CC
SEC

DSE

Educational Media Design & Production

DSE

Documentary Film Production

DSE

Semester – V

Semester - VI

Final Internship

DSE

Capstone Project
Comprehensive Studies

DSE
CC

Rural Social Engagement Programme

B. Com (Hons.) Accounting
SL.NO

NAME OF THE COURSE

CREDITS

COURSE CATEGORY

AECC
CC
CC
GE
SEC

AECC
CC
CC
GE
SEC

CC
CC
CC
SEC
GE

CC
CC
CC
SEC
GE

Semester - I

English
Financial Accounting-I
Principles of Management
Business Mathematics
Principles of Marketing

Semester – II

Environmental Studies
Business Law
Financial Management
Business Statistics
Introduction to OB& HR

Semester – III

Financial Institutions and Markets
Financial Accounting-II
Cost & Management Accounting-I
Computer Application for Business
Managerial Economics-I

Semester – IV

Banking
Direct Tax Law
E-commerce and Computerized Accounting
Ethics, Governance and Sustainability
Managerial Economics-II

Semester – V

Entrepreneurship Development

CC

Corporate Accounting
Indirect Tax Laws
DSE-1 (Anyone from Group - A)
DSE 2 (Anyone from Group A)

CC
SEC
DSE
DSE

Semester – VI

Corporate Laws
Auditing and Assurance Services
International Finance
DSE-3 (Anyone from Group - B)
DSE-4 (Anyone from Group - B)

Rural Social Engagement Programme

Group A
1. Insurance & Risk Management
2. Accounting Standards and Corporate Financial Reporting
3. Security Analysis & Portfolio Management
4. Marketing Research
5. Group Dynamics & Team Building
Group B
1. Derivatives
2. Fundamentals of Labour Laws
3. Financial Statement Analysis
4. Rural Marketing

CC
CC
SEC
DSE
DSE

B. Com (Hons.) Finance
SL.NO

NAME OF THE COURSE

CREDITS

COURSE CATEGORY

AECC
CC
CC
GE
SEC

Semester - I

English
Financial Accounting-I
Principles of Management
Business Mathematics
Principles of Marketing

Semester – II

Environmental Studies
Business Law

AECC
CC

Financial Management
Business Statistics
Introduction to OB& HR

CC
GE
SEC

Semester – III

Financial Institutions and Markets
Financial Accounting-II

CC
CC

Cost & Management Accounting-I

CC

Computer Application for Business
Managerial Economics-I

SEC
GE

Semester – IV

Banking
Direct Tax Law

CC
CC

E-commerce and Computerized Accounting

CC

Ethics, Governance and Sustainability
Managerial Economics-II

SEC
GE

Semester – V

Entrepreneurship Development

CC

Financial Management-II

CC

Security Analysis & Portfolio Management

SEC

DSE-1 (Anyone from Group - A)

DSE

DSE-2 (Anyone from Group - A)

DSE

Semester – VI

International Finance

CC

Corporate Laws
Derivatives

CC
SEC

DSE-3 (Anyone from Group - B)

DSE

DSE-4 (Anyone from Group - B)
Rural Social EngagementProgramme

DSE

Group A
1. Insurance & Risk Management
2. Indirect Tax Laws
3. Marketing Research
4. Corporate Accounting
5. Group Dynamics & Team Building
Group B
1. Financial Statement Analysis
2. Fundamentals of Labour Laws
3. Auditing and Assurance Services
4. Rural Marketing

B. B. M (Hons.) HR
SL.NO

NAME OF THE COURSE

CREDITS

COURSE CATEGORY

Semester - I

English
Financial Accounting-I
Principles of Management

AECC
CC
CC

Business Mathematics
Principles of Marketing

GE
SEC

Semester - II

Environmental Studies
Business Law
Financial Management

AECC
CC
CC

Business Statistics
Introduction to OB& HR

GE
SEC

Semester – III

HR Planning & Talent Acquisition
Individuals in Organization
Research Methodology
Computer Application for Business

CC
CC
CC
SEC

Managerial Economics-I

GE

Semester – IV

Soft Skill and Personality Development
Production and Operations Management

CC
CC

Training and Development
Ethics, Governance and Sustainability

CCSEC

Managerial Economics-II

GE

Semester – V

Entrepreneurship Development

CC

Group Dynamics & Team Building

CC

Performance Management
DSE-1 (Anyone from Group - A)
DSE-2 (Anyone from Group - A)

SEC
DSE
DSE

Semester – VI

Fundamentals of Labour laws

CC

Industrial and Employment Relations
Organization Structure and Design

CC
SEC

DSE-3 (Anyone from Group - B)
DSE-4 (Anyone from Group - B)
Rural Social Engagement Programme

DSE
DSE

Group A
1. Insurance & Risk Management
2. Accounting Standard and Corporate Financial Reporting
3. Financial Management-II
4. Change Management and Organization Development
Group B
1. Compensation and Reward Management
2. Auditing and Assurance Services
3. International Finance

B. B. M (Hons.) Marketing
SL.NO

NAME OF THE COURSE

CREDITS

COURSE CATEGORY

Semester - I

English
Financial Accounting-I
Principles of Management
Business Mathematics

AECC
CC
CC
GE

Principles of Marketing

SEC

Semester – II

Environmental Studies

AECC

Business Law
Financial Management
Business Statistics
Introduction to OB& HR

CC
CC
GE
SEC

Semester – III

Services Marketing

CC

Consumer Behaviour

CC

Research Methodology
Computer Application for Business
Managerial Economics-I

CC
SEC
GE

Semester – IV

Soft Skill and Personality Development

CC

Production and Operations Management
Distribution Management
Ethics, Governance and Sustainability
Managerial Economics-II

CC
CC
SEC
GE

Semester – V

Entrepreneurship Development

CC

Selling Lab

CC

Marketing Analytics

SEC

DSE-1 (Anyone from Group - A)
DSE-2 (Anyone from Group - A)

DSE
DSE

Semester – VI

Retail Marketing

CC

Marketing Communication
Rural Marketing

CC
SEC

DSE-3 (Anyone from Group - B)

DSE

DSE-4 (Anyone from Group - B)

DSE

Rural Social Engagement Programme

B.Tech. (Hons.) Computer Science and Engineering
SL.NO

NAME OF THE COURSE

CREDITS COURSE CATEGORY

Semester-I

Basic Electrical and Electronics
Programming in C
Engineering Graphics and Design

CC
CC
SEC

Engineering Mathematics I

CC

Engineering Physics
English Communication

CC
AECC

Semester -II

Digital Electronics and Logic Circu
its

CC

Object Oriented Programming with Java
Data Structures and Algorithms

CC
CC

Engineering Workshop
Engineering Mathematics II
Engineering Chemistry/ Modern Biology
Environmental Studies

SEC
CC
AECC
AECC

Semester -III

Problem Solving Using Python

CC

Computer Organization and Architecture
Formal Language and Automata Theory

CC
CC

Mathematics III
IT Workshop

CC
SEC

Technical Writing/ Business Communication

AECC

Constitution of India/ Essence of Indian Knowledge Tradition

AECC

Semester- IV

Database Management Systems

CC

Operating Systems

CC

Computer Networks
Web Technology
Discrete Mathematics
Organizational Behavior

CC
CC
CC
AECC

Semester -V

Artificial Intelligence and Applications
Algorithm Design and Analysis
Professional Elective Course I
Open Elective Course I
Mathematics IV (Electives)
Capstone Design I

CC
CC
DSE
GE
GE
SEC

Semester -VI

Machine Learning

CC

Professional Elective Course II

DSE

Professional Elective Course III
Open Elective Course II
Management Information Systems
Capstone Design II
Comprehensive Viva
MOOCS I

DSE
GE
AECC
SEC
AECC
SEC

CC
DSE
DSE
GE
GE
SEC
AECC

SEC
SEC

Semester- VII

Software Engineering
Professional Elective Course IV
Professional Elective Course V
Open Elective Course III
Open Elective Course IV
Thesis I
Internship Seminar

Semester -VIII

MOOCS II
Thesis II

LIST OF ELECTIVES (Tentative)
Professional Elective Courses
1.

Data Warehousing and Data Mining

9.

Cryptography and Network Security

2.

Parallel and Distributed Computing

10.

Computer Vision and Image Processing

3.
4.

Android Programming
Computer Graphics
Cloud/Edge/Fog Computing
Natural Language Processing
ERP and IT Service Management
Compiler Design

11.
12.

Blockchain Technology
Information retrieval (Text analytics)
Deep Learning
IoT
Soft Computing
Cyber Physical Systems

5.
6.
7.
8.

13.
14.
15.
16.

Open Elective Courses
1.

Microprocessor and Microcontroller

9.

Decision Sciences

2.
3.

Bioinformatics
VLSI and Embedded Systems

10.
11.

Financial Management
Marketing Management

4.

Wireless/ Mobile Communication

12.

Technology and operation managements

5.

Big-data Analytics

13.

Entrepreneurship & Start-up

6.

Social Network Analysis

14.

Cyber Laws and Ethics

7.
8.

Information theory and coding
Robotic Process Automation

15.

Business Strategies
Public Administration and Governance

16.

B.A. LL. B (Hons.)
SL.NO

NAME OF THE COURSE

CREDITS

Semester - I

Communicative English
Sociology
Introduction to Political Science
Legal & Constitutional history
Legal Method
Law of Torts

Semester - II

General English

Sociology & Social Issues

Economics-I

Constitutional Law

Law of Torts & Consumer Protection Act-II

Law of Contract-I

Semester - III

Introduction to Policy & Governance

Economics- II
Psychology
Constitutional Law-II
Indian Penal Code-I
Law of Contracts-II

Semester - IV

Basic Principles of Accounting

Introduction to Political Philosophy
Public Administration
Indian Penal Code-II
Jurisprudence

Interpretation of Statute

Semester - V

Criminal Procedure Code-I
Civil Procedure Code-I
Transfer of Property Act-I
Personal Law-I
Alternative Dispute Resolution

Environmental Law

Semester - VI

Criminal Procedure Code-II
Transfer of Property Act-II
Personal Law-II
Administrative Law
Civil Procedure Code-II

Public International Law

Semester - VII

Law of Evidence

Labour & Industrial Law-I

Company Law-I
Banking Law
Honours Paper (Any One from The Below List)
Constitutional Law
Criminal Law
Intellectual Property Rights
Corporate Law

Semester - VIII

Labour & Industrial Law -II
Company Law-II
Insurance Law
Direct Taxation
Honours Paper (Any One from The Below List)
Constitutional Law
Criminal Law
Intellectual Property Rights
Corporate Law

Semester - IX

Indirect Taxation
Professional Ethics & Professional Accounting

Drafting, Pleading & Conveyance

Private International Law
Honours Paper (Any One from The Below List)

Constitutional Law
Criminal Law
Intellectual Property Rights
Corporate Law
Semester - X

Moot Court Exercise & Internship

Dispute Resolution & Legal Aid
Laws of Carriages
Maritime Law
Elective -1 (Comprising of 4 Subjects)
Public Interest Litigation
Sports Law

Energy Law
Unlawful Activities Prevention Act-2019

Elective -2 (Comprising of 4 Subjects)
Right to Information

Aviation Law
Space Law
The Fugitive Economic Offenders Act-2018
Rural Social Engagement Programme

B.B.A. LL.B (Hons.)

SL.NO

NAME OF THE COURSE

CREDITS

Semester - I

Communicative English
Sociology
General Principles of Management
Legal & Constitutional history
Legal Method
Law of Torts

Semester - II

General English
Organizational Behaviour
Economics-I
Constitutional Law
Law of Torts & Consumer Protection Act-II
Law of Contract-I

Semester - III

Financial Management
Economics- II
Strategic Management

Constitutional Law-II
Indian Penal Code-I
Law of Contracts-II

Semester - IV

Criminal Procedure Code-II
Transfer of Property Act-II
Personal Law-II
Administrative Law
Civil Procedure Code-II
Public International Law

Semester - VII

Law of Evidence
Labour & Industrial Law-I
Company Law-I
Banking Law

Honours Paper (Any One from The Below List)

Constitutional Law
Criminal Law
Intellectual Property Rights
Corporate Law

Semester - VIII

Labour & Industrial Law-II
Company Law-II
Insurance Law
Direct Taxation
Honours Paper (Any One from The Below List)
Constitutional Law
Criminal Law
Intellectual Property Rights
Corporate Law

Semester - IX

Indirect Taxation
Professional Ethics & Professional Accounting
Drafting, Pleading & Conveyance
Private International Law
Honours Paper (Any One from The Below List)
Constitutional Law
Criminal Law
Intellectual Property Rights
Corporate Law

Semester - X

Moot Court Exercise & Internship
Dispute Resolution & Legal Aid
Laws of Carriages
Maritime Law
Elective -1 (Comprising of 4 Subjects)

Public Interest Litigation
Sports Law
Energy Law
Unlawful Activities Prevention Act-2019
Elective -2 (Comprising of 4 Subjects)
Right to Information
Aviation Law
Space Law
The Fugitive Economic Offenders Act-2018
Rural Social Engagement Programme

B.A. English (Hons.)
SL.NO

NAME OF THE COURSE

CREDITS

Semester - I
C-I
C-II
GE-I
AECC-I

British Poetry & Drama : 14th -17th Centuries
British Poetry & Drama :17th & 18th Century
GE-I*
AECC-I

Semester - II
C-III
C-IV
GE-II
AECC-II

Shakespeare
British literature : 18th Century
GE-II*
AECC-II

Semester - III
C-V
C-VI
C-VII
GE-III
SEC-I

British Romantic Literature
British Literature19th Century
Early 20th Century British Literature
GE-III*
SEC-I*

Semester - IV
C-VIII
C-IX
C-X
GE-IV
SEC-II

American Literature
African American Literature
Modern European drama
GE-IV*
SEC-II*

Semester - V

C-XI
C-XII
DSE -I
DSE-II

Women’s writing
Indian writing in English
DSE –I *
DSE-II *

Semester - VI

C-XIII
C-XIV
DSE-III
DSE-IV

Post-colonial Literature
Popular Literature
DSE-III*
DSE-IV*

B.A Psychology (Hons.)
SL.NO

NAME OF THE COURSE

CREDITS

COURSE CATEGORY

CC
CC
CC
AECC
GE

CC
CC
CC
AECC
GE

Semester - I

General Psychology – I
Developmental Psychology - I
Bio-Psychology – I
Environmental Studies
Adolescent Psychology
Semester – II

General Psychology –II
Developmental Psychology - II
Bio-Psychology – II
Communication Skills
Psychology And Mental Health
Semester – III

Statistics For Psychology
Experimental Psychology - I

CC
CC

Scientific Writing
Psychology For Self

SEC
GE

CC
CC
SEC
GE

CC
CC
DSE

CC
CC
DSE
DSE

Semester – IV

Research Methodology
Experimental Psychology - II
Introduction to HRM
Positive Psychology
Semester – V

Abnormal Psychology – I
Indian Psychology
Organizational Behavior
Semester – VI

Abnormal Psychology – II
Social Psychology
Project Work - II
Forensic Psychology

SECTION - D
SCHOOL WISE CONTACT DETAILS
School of Governance and Public Affairs
Phone: 0674 237 7758, deansgpa_office@ xim.edu.in
Sl. No.

Name

Extn.

Mobile No

E-Mail

Prof. S. Peppin (Dean)

deansgpa@xim.edu.in

Prof. Johny Arokiaraj P.

johny@xim.edu.in

Prof. Manoj Kar
Prof. Santap S. Mishra
Prof. Vaishali Singh

manoj@xim.edu.in
santap@xim.edu.in
vaishali@xim.edu.in

School of Sustainability
Phone : 0674 237 7759, deanxsos_office@ xim.edu.in
Sl. No.

Name

Extn.

Mobile No

E-Mail

Prof. Sutapa Pati (Dean)

deansos@xim.edu.in

Prof. Arup Roy

aruproy@xim.edu.in

Prof. Elizabeth Abba

elizabeth@xim.edu.in

Prof. Aradhana Basu

aradhana@xim.edu.in

Prof. Tanmay Khuntia

tanmay@xim.edu.in

Prof. Vikrant Vijay Patil
Prof. Devendraraj
Madhanagopal

vikrant@xim.edu.in

devendraraj@xim.edu.in

School of Economics
Phone : 0674 237 7767, deanxse_office@xim.edu.in
Sl. No.

Name

Extn.

Mobile No

E-Mail

Prof. Golaka C. Nath (Dean)

deanxse@xim.edu.in

Prof. Bharatee Bhusana Dash

bharateedash@ xim.edu.in

Prof. Debasmita Basu

debasmita@xim.edu.in

Prof. Pintu Parui

pintu@xim.edu.in

Prof. Sandip Sarkar

sandipsarkar@xim.edu.in

Prof. Amartya Paul

amartya@xim.edu.in

Prof. Tanmoy Das

tanmoy@xim.edu.in

School of Communications
Phone: 0674 237 7718, deancomm_office@ xim.edu.in
Sl. No.

Name

Extn.

Mobile No

E-Mail

Prof. V. Vijay Kumar (Dean)
Prof. Anamika
Prof. Arpita Saha
Prof. Jyoti Ranjan Sahoo
Prof. Nadira Khatun
Prof. Nirmalya Baral
Prof. Payel Das
Prof. Purnima Anjali Mohanty

deancomm@xim.edu.in
anamika@xim.edu.in
arpita@xim.edu.in
jyotiranjan@xim.edu.in
nadira@xim.edu.in
nirmalya@xim.edu.in
payel@xim.edu.in
purnima@xim.edu.in

School of Commerce
Phone : 0674 237 7761, deansoc_office@xim.edu.in
Sl. No.

Name

Extn.

Mobile No

E-Mail

Prof. P.K Mohanty (Dean)

Prof. Abhimanyu Sahoo

Prof. Anurag B Singh

Prof. Fr. V. Arockia Dass ,S.J. 7723/7790
Prof. Ashok Kumar Mishra

Prof. Faiz Ahamad

Prof. Radha Govind Indwar

Prof. Rashmi Singh

Prof. Rupjyoti Saha

Prof. Sandeep Ku Mohanty

Prof. Sibanjan Mishra

deansoc@xim.edu.in
subhajit@xim.edu.in
anurag@xim.edu.in
arockiasj@xim.edu.in
ashok@xim.edu.in
faiz@xim.edu.in
radhagovind@xim.edu.in
rashmisingh@xim.edu.in
rupjyoti@xim.edu.in
sandeep@xim.edu.in
sibanjan@xim.edu.in

Prof. Subhajit Bhattacharya
Prof. Sukanya Panda
Prof. Vijaya Batth
Prof. Md Washim Raja

subhajit@xim.edu.in
sukanya@xim.edu.in
vijaya@xim.edu.in
washim@xim.edu.in

Prof. Leesa Mohanty

leesa@xim.edu.in

School of Computer Science and Engineering
Phone: 0674 237 7731, deanxcse_office@ xim.edu.in
Sl. No.

Name

Extn.

Mobile No

E-Mail

Prof. Rudra. M. Tripathy (Dean)

rudramohan@xim.edu.in

Prof. Arif Ahmed Sekh

arif@xim.edu.in

Prof. Ashish Kumar

ashish@xim.edu.in

Prof. Chandan Misra

chandan@xim.edu.in

Prof. Devendra Kumar Yadav

devendra@xim.edu.in

Prof. Pradip Kundu

pkundu@xim.edu.in

Prof. Sourav Mandal

sourav@xim.edu.in

Prof. Swarup Chattopadhyay

swarupc@xim.edu.in

School of Liberal Arts
Phone : 06742 37 7758 , deansla_office@xim.edu.in
Sl. No.

Name

Extn.

Mobile No

E-Mail

Prof. Aarti Sangwan

aarti@xim.edu.in

Prof. Abhik Mukherjee

abhik@xim.edu.in

Prof. Fr Bipin Kumar Kujur, S.J.

bipinsj@xim.edu.in

Prof. Lourdes Vijayan R

lourdes@xim.edu.in

Prof. Sudha Mishra

sudha@xim.edu.in

Prof. Natasha Anand

natasha@xim.edu.in

Prof. P V Padma

padma@xim.edu.in

Prof. Sachidananda Panda

sachidananda@xim.edu.in

Prof. Vidya Pujari

vidya@xim.edu.in

Xavier Law School
Phone : 0674 237 3374, deanxls_office@xim.edu.in
Sl. No.

Name

Extn.

Mobile No

E-Mail

Prof. Narayan Chandra
Sarangi (Dean)

deanxls@xim.edu.in

Prof. Arun Sasi

arunsasi@xim.edu.in

Prof. Avnish Bhatt

avnish@xim.edu.in

Prof. Biranchi Narayan P Panda

biranchi@xim.edu.in

Prof. Manisha Chakraborty

manisha@xim.edu.in

Prof. Seemasmiti Pattjoshi

seemasmiti@xim.edu.in

Prof. Zahid Parwez

zahid@xim.edu.in